 
                                      January 28, 1991 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
 
 
 
        (Establishing Computer Emergency Response Teams, CERT's) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    Alan Fedeli, Manager 
                                    Inter-Enterprise Systems 
                                    IBM Corporation 
                                    1311 Mamaroneck Avenue 
                                    White Plains, N.Y. 10605 
 
                                    FEDELI@RHQVM14.IINUS1.IBM.COM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
        (Establishing Computer Emergency Response Teams - CERT's) 
 
 
        OVERVIEW 
        This document describes how IBM has learned to cope with viruses 
        and related threats.  It is based on two years' experience 
        establishing and operating corporate-wide CERT's. 
 
        The process of organizing corporate-wide defenses starts 
        with the realization that viruses and harmful code are 
        real problems, and the problems aren't going to go away if 
        ignored.  Unfortunately, the realization for most corporations 
        starts with a costly incident or two.  Then a central group 
        develops an understanding of what viruses are, how they differ 
        from worms and Trojan horses, and why they can't simply be 
        prevented by conventional security practices.  The implementation

        then comprises incident reporting/response, user education, 
        tools deployment, infection containment and follow-up, and 
        policy revision/communication. 
 
        WHAT IS A COMPUTER VIRUS 
        A computer virus is a program which is able to spread copies of 
        itself within other programs.  The virus infects the first 
        program it chooses, and then when the infected program is run, 
        the virus seeks to infect another program.  In addition to 
        spreading itself around, the virus may choose to create unusual 
        screen effects, make a statement, or erase files. 
 
        PREREQUISITE READING 
        For an understanding of the problem of viruses and for 
        suggestions about their prevention, detection, control, 
        and recovery, the following document should prove useful: 
 
             COPING WITH COMPUTER VIRUSES AND RELATED THREATS 
             IBM Publication G320-9913-00 
 
        CERT ORIGINS 
        In workshops held in August, 1989 and June, 1990, the 
        National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, 
        and Carnegie Mellon's Software Engineering Institute, SEI, 
        presented the concepts and model of CERT's for incident 
        management and response.  The IBM CERT system was based on 
        model presented at those workshops.  This document describes 
        how IBM implemented the CERT concept to achieve central 
        reporting and control of incidents occurring within IBM. 
 
 

ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
 
 
 
 
                      CONTENTS 
 
 
        Determining the Scope of the Problem.................4 
 
        Establishing Organizational Ownership................5 
 
        Gaining Executive Concurrence........................6 
 
        You've Got a Head Start..............................7 
 
        Computer Emergency Response Teams....................8 
 
        Central Reporting / Response.........................9 
 
        Developing Satellite CERT's.........................10 
 
        Selecting Anti-Virus Tools..........................11 
 
        Educating End Users.................................12 
 
        Focus Areas: Servers, Acquisition Policy............13 
 
        External Networking Considerations..................14 
 
        Summary, Conclusions................................15 
 
 

ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
DETERMINING THE SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM 
 
Before launching into a corporate-wide anti-virus effort, it was useful 
for us to determine the scope of the problem for our corporation.  The 
first question we asked was whether the focus of the activity should 
include micros, minis, and mainframes, or be limited to only the 
"afflicted" environment, the microprocessor environment for now. 
We have built our process around the microprocessor activity, but 
geared it for handling mini and mainframe episodes.  Our anti-virus 
process recognizes the impact of network spread of harmful code, 
providing for quicker emergency handling of episodes with a network 
component. 
 
Next, we assessed whether there was vulnerability to harmful code 
due to our company's acquisition and handling of software.  Wherever 
we allowed anyone to bring software in from the outside, wherever we 
distributed software externally, wherever there was a high degree of 
software sharing and transporting, we were at greater risk of becoming 
infected or infecting someone else. 
 
Finally, it was useful to assess the impact to our business of one 
of the following occurrences: 
     o  Critical systems getting infected causing the loss of valuable 
        information or loss of productivity during recovery. 
     o  Harmful code spreading rapidly through our networks, 
        tying up system and people resources. 
     o  Press reports indicating that viruses were rampant within 
        our company. 
     o  Accusations that our company infected some other company 
        or individual with whom we do business. 
 
With these assessments and evaluations, we had a better assessment 
of the scope of the problem, we identified areas of highest risk, 
and knew the degree of urgency with which the problem should be 
addressed.  We knew that we couldn't absolutely prevent one or more 
of the above from happening, but we know we could reduce the likelihood 
of those occurrences by employing appropriate virus countermeasures. 

ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
ESTABLISHING ORGANIZATIONAL OWNERSHIP 
 
Once we accepted that the problem of harmful code needed to be 
addressed, and that preventive measures were preferable to reacting 
to incidents after the fact, we needed to assign the responsibility 
for managing the problem to the right organization.  If this were 
more a mainframe or network problem, it would have been more natural 
to assign ownership to the Information Systems (I/S) organizations 
throughout the company.  But since the dominant infections were to be 
found in the PC environment, it wasn't clear that I/S owned the problem. 
 
I/S deals with microprocessors and minis differently in different 
corporations, and even differently within the same corporation. 
The "p" in personal computing leads many to view PC virus problems 
as end user problems.  I/S centers will initially assert that end-users 
themselves, or separate end-user support organizations are the ones 
responsible, not the I/S computing center. 
 
We determined that the I/S computing center should take a lead role 
in anti-virus incident management and control.  What is needed for 
incident management is central coordination and control, not the 
decentralized operation which is effective for other personal computer 
and miniprocessor functions.  Given the corporation has many large 
I/S centers, perhaps one at each major site and one or more in major 
countries, these large I/S computing centers were asked to: 
 
    1) identify focal point personnel for reporting suspected harmful 
       code whether in the micro, mini, or mainframe environment. 
    2) make these people known to the users of their systems, and 
       establish an easy means of locating them (eg. thru help desks). 
    3) be prepared to confirm suspected incidents, and report them 
       to the corporate central support group. 
    4) manage the containment of infections, tracing to the source, and 
       the cleanup of harmful code incidents. 
 
There were other functional organizations which could have taken on 
this responsibility, but we felt I/S should take the leadership role. 
Dealing with viruses requires the programming and systems expertise 
found in I/S organizations.  Two other candidate infrastructures 
which were considered were the security chain of command and end-user 
computing.  The security chain of command has an active interest in 
this subject, but it did not have sufficient technical depth to deal 
adequately with the management of virus incidents.  Besides, we view 
virus contamination more a quality issue than a security problem. 
End-user computing is a logical place for this responsibility to be 
placed, especially while viruses are largely a microprocessor issue. 
In some cases it is a moot point, since end-user computing is 
within I/S.  In other cases, end-user computing is fairly separate 
from the I/S organization.  The advantage to keeping the I/S focus 
on the problem is to treat the broader problem of harmful code in 
all platforms, and not just limit the topic to microprocessors. 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
GAINING EXECUTIVE CONCURRENCE 
 
Responding to the likelihood of viruses within the corporation 
takes resource, time, and attention.  If the corporation goes into 
prevent mode, it takes one level of resource- educating users, 
establishing focal points, central reporting, etc.  If the company 
does nothing, there is a reactive level of resource which is 
probably greater than the prevent level in most cases.   For this 
reason it is important to get executive understanding and backing 
for the anti-virus efforts.  An ounce of prevention may pay off. 
 
In order for executives in a corporation to authorize anti-virus 
activities, they must be convinced that: 
    1) there is a problem 
    2) the problem is likely to affect their company 
    3) preventive measures are cost effective 
 
In order to make a cogent argument stating that viruses are a problem 
and the likelihood of numerous incidents is fairly high, one would like 
to have access to the incident statistics of other similar companies. 
Unfortunately, most companies are reluctant to share their incident 
rates with others for fear of damaging the firm's reputation and 
loss of customer confidence.  This is especially true for banks, other 
financial institutions, and companies in the computer industry. 
The fact is that most businesses are seeing an increasing number 
of virus incidents, but they can't easily share the alarm or the 
data with others. 
 
In any event, once executive management understands the nature 
of the problem and the vulnerability, it is helpful to have 
specific directives which you want them to initiate, and specific 
support that you will require.  Some specific directives could be: 
 
       1) a letter from executive management requiring all PC users 
          to take anti-virus measures, including scanning for known 
          viruses and following guidelines which reduce the risk 
          of being infected (see Coping with Computer Viruses and 
          Related Threats, referenced in the overview). 
       2) an I/S directive establishing focal points in I/S centers 
          which can deal with suspected virus incidents. 
       3) a directive to all employees for the reporting of 
          confirmed incidents centrally. 
 
The specific support required includes staffing the central group and 
getting commitment from each I/S center.  The cost of anti-virus 
tools should be considered, as well as the cost to deploy the tools 
on a regular basis. 

ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI VIRUS EFFORT 
 
YOU'VE GOT A HEAD START 
 
Up to now this sounds like action in which corporate headquarters comes 
to the rescue of the entire corporation.  That would be very unrealistic,

and that wasn't our experience.  Long before corporate became aware of 
the problem, the technical community was involved and doing something 
about it. This isn't so much a corporate criticism as it is an indication

that just as certainly as there are viruses spreading around, there are 
people who have already started to deal with the problem.  The idea is 
to discover who these people are, and leverage their activity. 
 
In our company we found that a handful of researchers in the U.S., and 
several employees from our European sites had already been active in 
anti-virus efforts.  They had been tuned to external sources, they had 
analyzed viruses, and they had written anti-virus tools.  The people 
involved were involved more out of commitment to anti-virus efforts 
rather than because of formal job description.  We respected their 
insights and took their guidance on anti-virus matters.  We then 
institutionalized a process around the head start these technical 
researchers had given us. 
 

ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
COMPUTER EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAMS - CERT's 
 
The nerve system of a corporate anti-virus operation is the CERT 
team organization at each major I/S site.  The people anointed 
to do this must be technically "confident," and willing to learn 
during a crisis.  The CERT team needn't be dedicated staff; it 
almost never is.  Instead, the team should be composed of the best 
technical people in the disciplines likely to be needed. 
 
The currently active CERT skill these days is the PC expert.  Since 
we are dealing with a series of PC virus incidents, he will be the 
most frequently called person today.  The team should include people 
with mini, mainframe, and network skills as well.  These people 
should be well connected to site security, and of course to the 
corporate central team. 
 
The site CERT advertises itself to the constituent users of computing 
resource at that site.  He is known to the help desk, and he publishes 
communiques which identify him as the local CERT contact point.  He 
will ask to be informed of all suspicious cases of harmful code.  He 
will also make tools and aids available at his site to assist in the 
education of end users and their ability to detect viruses. 
 
There will be times when end-users report directly to the central CERT 
rather than their local CERT.  The central CERT will want to respond 
to an emergency, but it will be careful not to bypass the necessary 
involvement of the local CERT.  We permit direct end-user reporting to 
the central CERT, but always tie in the local CERT immediately. 
 
We have found the key to effective CERT activity is to build CERT skill 
at the site level to maximize the investment of incident management 
experience. 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
CENTRAL REPORTING AND RESPONSE 
 
Central coordination is vital to the anti-virus effort.  Without 
a central reporting mechanism, a company would never know whether 
it was dealing with many incidents or just a few.  When incidents 
occurred, it wouldn't be clear whether the infections were isolated 
or related.  Without central expertise and response, anti-virus 
efforts would be haphazard, inefficient, and even dangerous. 
 
The central group should be technical enough that they could lead 
a major infection cleanup.  The staff should be "hands on" types 
who like to swing into action.  They also should be dedicated enough 
to be willing to respond at strange hours of the night, and monitor 
the situation nights and weekends, from a home terminal if possible. 
At the same time, the central CERT should understand that they have 
to manage most incidents through others, so they must learn to be 
patient with the system. 
 
If a confirmed incident is reported, the central group should get 
hot on the trail.  They should provide quick and expert advice, but 
electronically copy the local CERT if the report was from an end-user. 
In this way, the local CERT participates and improves its experience. 
Our process includes sharing incident reports and responses with our 
Research organization.  Research is able to watch the action without 
being on the hook to respond.  In effect, they were watching for the 
very unusual scenario which might have necessitated their involvement. 
 
Initially our central reporting was to a hotline, but we moved to an 
E-mail arrangement with an ID actually called VIRUS.  It worked much 
better since it allowed for accurate documentation of incidents, and 
easy sharing amongst the technical team. 
 
Of course, each incident must be handled with diplomacy, sensitivity, 
and the confidentiality needed for each situation. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
DEVELOPING SATELLITE CERTS 
 
Our CERT plan was to have central control with decentralized skill. 
We worked to develop the CERT's at each of the remote/satellite I/S 
centers.  We gave them the information, guidance, support, and most 
important, we gave them the ball on incidents.  If the skill isn't 
there, they will resist at first.  Once the central team coaches them 
through a few successes, they will gain confidence and control of 
their territory.  We kept our expectations of the satellite CERT's high, 
kept them informed, well-connected, and well-supported, and they did 
a job that central couldn't do.  They have two big advantages: 
there are more of them and they are closer to the infection. 
 
Once again, we had some natural advantages here.  Some CERT's were 
fighting viruses long before corporate got involved.  We tried not to 
get too bureaucratic for these groups.  A second advantages is that 
in every site that had gotten burned by a virus episode, the attention 
and skill is very strong indeed.  The trick is to get the attention 
and participation of sites which haven't been burned, so that they can 
minimize the harm from their first incidents. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
SELECTING ANTI-VIRUS TOOLS 
 
A company looking for a panacea for computer viruses might wish to 
start with the tools first, then worry about policy, education, and 
even tools deployment.  While good anti-virus tools are important, 
they are useless in uneducated hands or if improperly deployed.  It 
is fundamental to assess what the user community is capable of doing 
to protect itself from viruses. 
 
For the general population of users, there are two basic types of 
tools used to defend against the known viruses.  They are scanners 
and active monitors.  Scanners search users' disks for the signatures 
of known viruses; active monitors are run when a user powers up, 
watching for patterns of known viruses.  Both require frequent update 
as new viruses are discovered.  Both are valuable anti-virus tools. 
Scanners are easier to deploy and refresh, but they depend on the 
user's diligence (eg scan frequently).  Active monitors are harder 
to deploy because they must be installed in the user's autoexec, 
but once installed, the user doesn't have to remember to do anything 
except keep it updated. 
 
Deployment of the proper selection of tools is the crux of the matter. 
Remembering that we don't want the cure to be worse than the illness, 
we want to get reasonable defenses into the users' hands with minimal 
cost.  Cost includes price of the anti-viral software and time spent 
distributing, installing, educating, and refreshing.  Since there may 
be hundreds or thousands of PC users in one company, the time spent/ 
wasted per user becomes a big productivity factor.  Ideally, the plan 
would be to integrate dissemination and education for the tools 
through the "common denominator" system, such as the E-MAIL or Office 
system.  Simple techniques to download and install onto the workstation 
would be helpful.  Attention must be paid to the different environments 
(eg host session emulators, download programs, PC configurations) so 
that generalized instructions are defect free. 
 
Finally, the anti-virus distribution process should itself be as virus 
resistant as possible.  The tools themselves should have virus resistant 
features and the roll out process should avoid distributing infected 
tools. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
EDUCATING END USERS 
 
We can't reduce the disruptive effects of computer viruses without 
the cooperation of educated users.  Indeed, one of our problems is that 
there is a substantial population of PC users who are not well educated 
in the use of their PC's, merely using them as a means to an end.  In 
their case, somebody set up their environment; they merely push buttons. 
These users present a special vulnerability.  They probably don't have 
a good discipline for backing up vital data, they wouldn't be able to 
recognize the difference between a program bug, user error, or a possible

virus.  It is also very difficult to describe to this type of user what 
a virus is and how it spreads.  Yet, getting an appropriate message 
across to all users is vital to stemming the problem of viral spread. 
The more sophisticated users can be taught more easily, and by their 
understanding of the problem, they should take the necessary safeguards. 
 
There are two time frames for reaching the naive users described above. 
You can try to reach them in advance, getting their attention by trying 
to explain what the problem and risk is, and giving them some preventive 
steps.  The other time frame is when that user is himself infected, or 
someone very near to him (same dept) is infected.  It is wise to plan 
for both education time frames. 
 
Policy disciplines can help educate users to take preventive steps. 
They can be taught to take more frequent backups.  They can be directed 
to acquire software from a central official source.  They can be 
taught to write protect diskettes which contain files which should 
never change.  They can develop better computer hygiene habits. 
 
There is another approach to anti-virus education.  That is, educating 
the user's system rather than the user.  If the right vaccine could be 
easily rolled out to all PC's, and easily refreshed, then the need 
for user education is diminished. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
FOCUS AREAS: SERVERS, SOFTWARE ACQUISITION POLICY 
 
Microprocessor viruses are generally slow spreaders unless the 
infection gets into the "drinking water."  We want to keep the 
sources from which many users "drink" virus free.  Extra protection 
and care should be given to LAN servers and software libraries or 
repositories.  Once these have infected programs, the spread of 
infection becomes dramatic. 
 
The way to "purify" LAN servers and software repositories is through 
a combination of procedure/policy and scanning.  Not everyone should 
have the ability to put programs up on servers or repositories.  By 
controlling update access, you limit the exposure of getting infected 
in the first place.  Scanning of LAN's and distribution libraries should 
be vigorous.  Daily scanning makes a great deal of sense. 
 
In order to reduce the risk of picking up a virus from "outside," 
a corporation may wish to tighten its software acquisition policy 
and rules.  For a variety of reasons, most companies insist that 
software used on the job be acquired centrally and dispensed by 
"the PC store."  This has economic and control advantages.  However, 
if the PC store is bureaucratic and has built in delays, people will 
bypass the store and acquire software any way they can. 
 
If you can centralize the acquisition of ALL software, then the central 
group can institute scanning measures to ensure software is virus free. 
This should be done for formally purchased "shrink wrapped" software 
as well as software acquired by other means.  In order to encourage 
central acquisition, policy should be strict, but service should also 
be good.  It is easier to gain cooperation if the PC store acts quickly 
on reasonable requests. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
EXTERNAL NETWORKING CONSIDERATIONS 
 
One of the quickest means of entering an organization's systems 
and networks is through its connections to the outside.  Such 
"inter-enterprise system connections" help organizations to become 
more productive when dealing with customers and suppliers, but 
they open new avenues of exposure.  We think of the network worms 
which were unleashed in recent years with great reach and heavy 
press coverage.  The Internet worm might not have been a virus in 
the strictest sense of the definition, but by affecting 6,000 systems 
so quickly, it underscores the potential of harmful code in inter- 
connected networks. 
 
Corporations should have a policy and discipline for the manner in 
which connections are made to the outside.  Connections to other 
companies' networks and systems, to third party data bases, or to 
the public via dial access, should be weighed carefully.  These 
connections can be controlled as to WHO and WHAT is authorized across 
those links.  For instance, you might not accept dial-ins without 
callback, and you might not permit the transfer of executable code 
across an E-MAIL gateway. 
 
ORGANIZING A CORPORATE ANTI-VIRUS EFFORT 
 
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS 
 
Every company that depends on computers is going to have to deal with 
the problem of harmful code.  If the company depends on an environment 
or platform in which viruses already exist, such as PC's, there may be 
a greater sense of urgency.  Even if the dominant environment of that 
company has been virus free up to now, we know of no environment which 
enjoys a natural immunity to viruses.  The problem isn't going to go 
away, so it shouldn't be ignored.  On the other hand, the problem isn't 
so serious or difficult that it defies effective countermeasures. 
We can deal with the problem.  We can prevent infection by known viruses,

and we can reduce the risk of infection by new viruses. 
 
We decided to get organized to deal with the phenomenon of harmful code, 
and we decided to do it in a way that would prepare us for handling 
today's incidents while building the process and procedure for dealing 
with newer classes of harmful code in the future.  Of course we prefer 
to see the problem get no worse, but we would rather be poised for 
an unpredictable escalation. 
  
 
