
An Idiot's Guide to computer viruses       -      by Greg Miskelly

                             Contents                    Line No

   Foreword...................................................44
   Definition and type........................................69
        General perception....................................72
   What is a computer virus..................................107
        Trojans..............................................210
        Program file infectors...............................350
        Companion viruses....................................515
        Worms................................................555
        Boot sector infectors................................574
        Document infecting viruses...........................841
        Other types of infection mechanisms..................865
   Operating Systems.........................................892
        IBM Compatible PCs...................................898
        Macintosh PCs........................................932
        UNIX................................................1001
        Novell..............................................1017
        Others..............................................1054
        Multi Platform Viruses..............................1070
   Prevention, Protection and Control, A Policy Issue.......1095
        General Overview....................................1098
        Countermeasures in the Corporate Environment........1108
             Cost Effective Prevention Measures.............1121
             Cost Effective Monitoring Methods..............1167
             Risk Analysis..................................1239
             Funding the Protection.........................1254
        Countermeasures in the Home Environment.............1332
   Locating and Eradicating.................................1451
        Commercial Anti-Virus Packages......................1462
             TSR Monitors...................................1469
             Scanners.......................................1495
                  Heuristic Scanning........................1533
             Integrity Checkers.............................1567
             Disinfectors...................................1588
   What to do when an infection is suspected................1619
   Prospects for the Future.................................1742
        The Glut............................................1745
   The Virus Authors........................................1887
   Conclusion...............................................2007

     Foreword
     ========

This document began as a handout to accompany a presentation by
myself to the WordPerfect User Group, Northern Ireland, on 12th
September 1994. Since then it has been modified to suit a number
of different requirements. This incarnation is a result of
modifications made after the document had been posted in the
FidoNet Virus conference. After posting the document I have
received suggestions and modifications by Stuart Grier, Michael
Edwards and Guy Lefrancois that I have now incorporated into the
text. Many thanks to all three of them.

This document is public domain, and may be modified and updated
by anyone who has an interest in preventing computer virus
infections. Obviously, that majority of the text below is written
for a readership within the United Kingdom, and some of the
examples may not be appropriate for other parts of the world.

Please feel free to utilise this document in any way you see fit.
I have no objections to it being modified to suit the requirements
of other geographic locations. The only thing that I ask is that
if you have modified the document for a particular purpose, please
put "Modified by Your Name" on the line prior to the Contents.

     Definition and Type
     ===================

General Perception
------------------

There is a general misconception that all malicious computer code
is some form of computer virus. This is not true. Indeed, most
malicious code is written with a specific target in mind and is
then directed specifically at that target. I have included some
information about all the different forms of malicious code that I
am aware of within this document.

The public at large are very badly informed about malicious
computer programs, largely due to the methods of reporting in the
media. The media tends to sensationalise all reporting of computer
viruses. A major player in the Anti-Virus community, namely, John
McAffee will no longer talk to anyone in the media because of a
gross misrepresentation regarding the Michelangelo Virus in 1992.

Other examples of the ignorance of the media include the over
zealous reporting of the discovery of the Junkie virus by Reflex
staff in May 1994, and a virus incident in Australia which was
resolved by the use of the Invircible anti-virus product in early
1995. The Junkie virus was hailed as a super virus, when in fact
it is a run of the mill multipartite virus. The Invircible product
was described as the only product capable of real anti-virus
protection, when in fact the problem in Australia arose as a
result of incompetent use of other viable anti-virus products.

In the following subsections, most of the descriptions and
examples apply more correctly to viruses written to infect IBM
Compatible PC computers. I feel that this is reasonable on the
grounds that most computer viruses are targeted at that type of
machine and because IBM Compatible PCs are the most common type of
computer system in use around the world.


     What is a Computer Virus
     ========================

It is almost impossible to define what a computer virus is because
new types of virus appear daily and will generally not conform to
the existing rules.

  "a program which replicates without the user's awareness and
   co-operation.... a threat because we don't know it is there"

               Alan Solomon (S&S International)

I have used the definition above for convenience. The significant
word within the definition is "replicates". Replication should be
interpreted as being able to create a new program which will
perform a similar action, not an exact copy of the original. Many
new polymorphic viruses replicate in such a way that their
'offspring' may resemble the 'parent' by only one or two bytes
(there is a simplistic explanation of polymorphic viruses below).

Computer users have often wondered why their governments have not
provided specific legislation to protect against computer viruses
and their authors. As it is almost impossible to define what a
computer virus is, it is therefore nearly impossible to
effectively prosecute the miscreants. Even if it was possible to
define a computer virus, it would still not be possible to make
that computer code illegal. It is entirely feasible (though it is
very unlikely) that an author may create replicating code by
mistake.

The only thing that can effectively be prosecuted is the malicious
intent of the person who infects a system (not necessarily the
author). Prosecutions based on intent have been widely used in
theft cases in the United Kingdom, so this is the best means
available to the authorities. Much of the Misuse of Computers Act
deals with the issue of intent.

In the United Kingdom, there have been a number of attempts to
prosecute virus authors. The most successful have been the
prosecution against Mr Christopher Pile who was convicted of
eleven offenses under the Misuse of Computers Act, and the
prosecution of members of the Association for Really Cruel Viruses
(ARCV) authoring group for stealing telephone time (known by the
computer underground as phreaking).

Mr Pile had uploaded virus infected files to a number of BBSs in
the United Kingdom. Most BBS operators (SysOps) keep records of
all transactions on their systems, and it was therefore possible
for the police to discover the source of the viruses. The viruses
in question have become known as the SMEG viruses which have
subsequently been named Pathogen and Queeg. Mr Pile was known by
the pseudonyme (handle) 'The Black Baron' and it is likely that he
was the author of the Simulated Metamorphic Encryption Engine
(SMEG). Mr Pile received an eighteen month jail sentence for his
activities, but it should be remembered that he was not prosecuted
for writing viruses, he was convicted of intent to perform
malicious acts with those viruses that he had written.

The prosecution in the ARCV case was successfully applied to one
of their leaders, a juvenile, known as 'Apache Warrior'. Again, no
attempt was made to prosecute for writing viruses, nor was there a
prosecution for trying to infect any systems, just the theft of
telephone time. Other members of the ARCV group have been given
cautions by the police, most significantly, the co leader of the
group, known as Ice-9. The nature of the telephone time theft was
that Apache Warrior had linked his modem to a neighbour's
telephone line and had then made numerous calls to virus
underground BBS systems in the United States. Investigation of an
extremely large telephone bill lead to the discovery of the
tampering with the connection.

Although the success of prosecution of active participants in the
virus underground appears to be limited, it should be remembered
that the United Kingdom is far in advance of most countries in
the world in this respect. Other nations do not have the facility
or experience to prosecute on the aspect of intent, which is long
established in British Law.

In Australia, Clinton Haines, a student at the University of
Queensland, has been interviewed by the media and talked about
his activities as an author of viruses, namely the Dudley and
NoFrills viruses, both of which are in the wild (the term "in the
wild" means that the virus is unchecked, and actively infecting
systems belonging to ordinary people or businesses). Even though
these viruses have infected major corporations in Australia, no
action can be taken against this individual because Australian law
does not provide any facility for an action of this sort.

In the USA, "freedom of speech" protects virus authors against
prosecution. One of the most common viruses in the USA, Natas, is
generally accepted as having been written by James Gentile, yet
no prosecution has ever taken place.

In the United Kingdom, this ability to prosecute the intent of a
malicious individual should not be regarded as an effective
deterrent. Mr Pile uploaded his malicious code long after the
prosecution in the ARCV case. Neither does the possibility of the
prosecution of the miscreant detract from the possible
prosecution under the Data Protection Legislation for inadequate
protection of data. The target of an attack might be prosecuted
for negligence. It is essential that vigilance is maintained and
there is adequate legislative requirement for it.

Trojans
-------

Trojans (Trojan Horse Programs) are by far the most numerous type
of malicious programs. They are not viruses. There is no estimate
on how many of these programs exist. There are literally
thousands of them. They are generally designed to perform a
single task, and as their name suggests, are hidden inside
programs that normally perform acceptable functions. Many trojans
are written by programmers when their employment status may be
undermined. The program may continue to operate satisfactorily,
long after the individual has left the company until the set
criteria for operation of the malicious functioning is met, eg, a
specific date or a given set of circumstances (known as the
trigger). Trojans that have been designed by capable programmers
who have knowledge of the target system can be devastating. An
example of this is where the backup arrangements are known and
are specifically interfered with for a time period which would
reduce the restore capability to nil. At this point the main
destructive activity (payload) would activate which would destroy
or corrupt all of the existing data.

Other types of trojans now exist that are known as droppers.
These droppers will simply release a replicating virus into
memory when the payload criteria have been met. The owner of the
infected machine will then try to eradicate the virus but will
find that it keeps reappearing without knowing which of his/her
executable files is causing the problem. The most successful of
these types of trojans are hidden inside computer games, or
programs designed to break computer game passwords (crackers).
Many users of pirated software, mostly games (known by the virus
writing community as warez) have password cracking Terminate And
Stay Resident (TSR) programs on their machines which will defeat
the game password by bombardment techniques. The main problem
with trojans is the fact that they do not specifically replicate
and are almost impossible to find by scanners. The Anti-Virus
vendors try to counteract the activity of some trojans by using
Terminate and Stay Resident (TSR) monitoring programs that
attempt to supervise activity in memory. A TSR means that the
program is loaded during the startup process and will remain
active throughout the session at the computer.

One of the best known dropper trojans is in fact disguised within
a hacking (the term "hacking" is not used correctly and should
really be referred to as "cracking" ) tool known as NETCRACK.EXE.
This program is designed to break Novell Network passwords by
bombardment techniques. The original program has been infected
with the Taipan.666 virus and then compressed using the PKLite
compression application program. Therefore, the use of
NETCRACK.EXE will also infect the target system with the virus.
Another more famous use of a dropper trojan was the same virus,
ie, Taipan.666 being incorporated into a program called NETCHEAT
which is a cracker for the game known as Doom. Players of the
game called the infection the "Doom to Death" virus.

Known trojans are listed in the Hack List, a periodically
released program originating in the Netherlands. It can be
downloaded from BBS systems under the file name HACKLIST.Z??, or
HACKLIST.A??, or HACKLIST.* depending on the archiving software
that is used on the BBS system.

The last, and perhaps the most serious, type of trojan is
application code that is badly written. Many MicroSoft Windows
users are aware that sometimes the applications that they run
cause general protection faults. This is annoying but will
normally only cause irritation. Also, there are many application
programs that run under the MicroSoft Windows operating
environment that allow resources to 'leak' into RAM thereby
reducing available system resources.

Other serious faults can exist in widely used software; perhaps
the most famous being a bug in CHKDSK.EXE which was released with
MicroSoft DOS Version 5.0 (DOS stands for Disk Operating System).
This program was supposed to be a utility to rectify problems
that can sometimes occur in the File Allocation Table (FAT) which
is a file containing the whereabouts of other files on computer
disks. It has an optional switch /F which will fix errors in the
FAT. However, if the size of the hard disk was in the region of
128 Megabytes (Mb) or multiples of 128 Mb then CHKDSK would
overwrite areas of the hard disk that contained essential
information for the operation of the computer.

Another example of a trojan caused by a programming error was one
line of erroneous code which brought down most of the AT&T
Telephone Network in the USA. The code was to provide a temporary
re-routing of traffic if the distribution point became overloaded.
Unfortunately, the receiving site also activated the re-routing
and an effect similar to falling dominos, ended up causing all
telecommunication traffic to be redirected simultaneously.

Application program macro languages can be used to create trojans.
Wordperfect's macro language is very amenable to this. Another
possibility is the use of Postscript which has potential to
become more of a problem as more users send file attachments with
E-Mail. Postscript code can contain file deletion functions which
are supposed to be used for the deletion of temporary print files.
However, competent programmers can use this facility to delete
significant files within the operating system.

A curiosity perhaps, but there is another type of trojan program
known as an ANSI Bomb (ANSI is the acronym for American National
Standards Institute). ANSI.SYS is a system file (TSR program)
that can be loaded during the running of the CONFIG.SYS file (a
file used for configuring the operating system at startup).
Computer users are most aware of ANSI.SYS facilities for the
purpose of providing colour to text on screen. However, ANSI.SYS
also allows for the reassignment of keys so that the depression
of a single key on the keyboard can activate a complete command
string, including the carriage return. If ANSI.SYS has been
loaded on the target machine and a text file is displayed on
screen using the DOS TYPE command, any embedded Escape sequences
will be acted on by ANSI.SYS as an operator instruction. Most
ANSI Bombs are trivial in that the most malicious thing that they
can do is probably a format of the hard disk. Appropriate backup
facilities will reduce the effect of an ANSI Bomb to an
irritation, rather than a nuisance.

For those computer users that have a requirement to load an ANSI
driver on their computers, there are alternatives to ANSI.SYS
that do not permit keyboard reassignment. There are two methods
to use. The first is to use an alternative such as PC Magazine's
ANSI.COM which simply does not permit the keyboard reassignment,
or a program such as PKSFANSI.COM (from PKWare) which can be
loaded after ANSI.SYS is in memory and will filter reassignment
instructions before they get to ANSI.SYS. This second method is
very useful for disabled computer users who might require some
keyboard reassignment to take place. Once the valid instructions
have been processed by ANSI.SYS then PKSFANSI can be loaded to
prevent unauthorised modifications.

It should be noted, that almost all types of virus display trojan
activity whenever their activation circumstances (payload
triggers) are met. Nearly all viruses are replicating programs
that become trojans. The virus is simply the transportation
mechanism that delivers a trojan indiscriminately to computer
systems. This trojan activity is generally becoming less
destructive as the phenomenon of virus creation matures. This is a
personal opinion which is difficult to support statistically, but
is the result of intuition on my part.

Program File Infectors
----------------------

Most non technical computer users who are aware of computer
viruses generally believe that all viruses are of the program
file infector type. A basic description of file infecting viruses
is shown below. The rectangular boxes represent compiled computer
code. The term J represents a jump instruction which is used by
the virus.

A computer program is a long list of instructions that instruct
the computer to perform actions based on input by the user. For
example, in a word processor, the program will place the cursor
on screen and then wait for input. If the user inputs a character
then the program will determine that a character key has been
depressed and will jump to the section of the program that deals
with this type of input. What will happen is that the character
will be displayed on screen and the cursor is moved one place to
the right. The program will then jump back to the wait state. Had
the input been a function key, the program would have jumped to
the portion of code that deals with that particular function, eg,
printing the document, or saving the document to the hard disk.

In the diagram below, the Normal Executable File is just a
program such as a word processing program. Within it are
considerable jump instructions to various functions that are
performed by the program. These are not shown, because it would
make the diagram too complicated.

           ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
           ³ Normal Executable File ³
           ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
              ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
              ³J Virus Code J³
              ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ
          ÚÄÄ>ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄJumpÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ>ÄÄ¿
         ÚÁÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
         ³J³ Normal Executable File ³Virus Code J³
         ÀÄÁÂÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÁÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÂÙ
            ÀÄÄ<ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄJumpÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ<ÄÄÙ


Generally, when the virus infects an ordinary executable file, it
writes a small instruction at the beginning of the file that
redirects the execution sequence to the main body of the virus
code which is then added at the end of the file. Obviously, this
is not always the case, but is sufficient to describe what is
happening. Once the virus code is active in memory it will then
perform whatever task the virus author has designed. It then jumps
to the beginning of the ordinary code and the file will then
perform as normal so that the user does not perceive that anything
is wrong with the machine.

The fact that user of the program is unaware of the unauthorised
activity on the computer is the main reason why viruses can
spread. If the user then copies this infected program to a
diskette and then into another computer, that computer will then
become infected, thereby starting the cycle again.

In the vast majority of situations the task of the virus will be
the process of replication. This can be performed in various ways:

     the virus may seek out an uninfected executable and append a
     representation of itself to that file;

     the virus might remain in memory similar to a TSR program and
     specifically target significant executable files as they are
     executed, or opened;

     the virus might use other more complex methods of infection.

     Once the replication aspect of the virus code has been
     completed, the virus might then test whether it's payload
     criteria have been met, eg, is the date Friday 13th, or March
     6th, or whatever. If the payload criteria have been met then
     the trojan code within the virus will be activated.

It is very easy therefore for anti-virus scanners to detect this
type of virus because they only need to read the first few bytes
of the file to determine if there is a jump instruction. If the
jump instruction is found then the scanner will follow that
instruction to the main body of the virus code. Once the scanner
is within the main body of the virus code it can then identify the
virus by known sequences of code.

The problem is that virus authors are aware that a scanner can be
used in this way, and so many authors write their viruses in such
a way that an identifiable string can not be found by the scanner.
The consequence of this is polymorphic viruses. A polymorphic
virus is one where the main body of code changes during each
incarnation of the virus. A very crude method of understanding
this would be to evaluate the two equations below.

                1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 = 28

                6 + 4 + 2 + 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 28

In both cases the result of the equation is 28. However, the
second character string is nothing like the initial one yet it
will still produce the same outcome. Basically, the virus code
can be shuffled during each incarnation of the virus, yet it will
still be able to perform a similar action.

Most polymorphic viruses also use other protection mechanisms to
avoid detection. These will be discussed later.

In order for a program file infector virus to be successful it
must allow time for itself to propagate onto another machine
before releasing its payload and identifying itself. The
determination of the appropriate amount of time required is a
complex problem for the virus author. The vast majority of the
actions carried out by successful viruses are merely the
replication aspect of their code. Viruses that do not allow the
appropriate amount of replication time will not survive in
ordinary operation of computers (in the wild). Even though the
functionality of the code is viable, the author must take into
consideration the payload criteria, if he chooses to include a
payload. The SMEG viruses mentioned above were faulty in only
this respect. The payload became effective too early in the
process. It was therefore possible for the police to trace the
original source. This was fortunate because the SMEG viruses are
complex. Had the author managed to identify a more suitable
payload criteria then these viruses could be much more widespread
than they are at present. It would also have seriously diminished
the possibility of a successful detection of their origin by the
police.

Variants of program file infectors are known as fast and slow
infectors. A typical program file infector (such as the Jerusalem)
copies itself to memory when a program infected by it is executed,
and then infects other programs when they are executed.

A fast infector is a virus which, when it is active in memory,
infects not only programs which are executed, but even those which
are merely opened. The result is that if such a virus is in
memory, running a scanner or integrity checker can result in all
(or at least many) programs becoming infected all at once.
Examples are the Dark Avenger (Eddie) and the Frodo viruses.

The term slow infector is sometimes used for a virus which, if it
is active in memory, infects only files as they are modified (or
created). The purpose is to fool people who use integrity checkers
into thinking that the modification reported by the integrity
checker anti-virus program is due solely to legitimate reasons. An
example is the Darth Vader virus. The concept of the acceptable
modification of an executable might be difficult to understand,
but there are many executable programs that write configuration
information to their own executable code. This will happen most
often where overlay (.OVL) files are used in application programs.

The final type of program file infector is known as a sparse
infector which infects only occasionally, e.g. every 10th executed
file, or only files whose lengths fall within a narrow range, etc.
By infecting less often, such viruses try to minimize the
probability of being discovered by the computer operator.

Regardless of the nature of the file infecting method used by the
virus, the consequence is that at least some of the executable
programs on the machine will be come infected by the virus. Once
these programs have been executed then the machine is in a state
whereby control is passed to the virus. The virus may remain in
memory, sometimes using stealth techniques to prohibit detection
(stealth will be discussed more in the Boot Sector Infector
section).

Companion Viruses
-----------------

These are amongst the first type of viruses to be successful.
Their mode of operation is quite simple. Instead of adding code
to an existing executable file (.EXE executables), they merely
wrote a copy of their code to a .COM file with the same name as
the .EXE file. The Disk Operating System (DOS) will always execute
a .COM file in preference to a .EXE file when presented with both
in the same directory, eg,

     C:>dir filename.*

      Volume in drive C is MS-DOS_6
      Volume Serial Number is 1C0C-869C
      Directory of C:\DIRNAME

     FILENAME.COM         3,220 10/09/94   21:18
     FILENAME.EXE        15,833 10/08/93   21:16
            2 file(s)         18,053 bytes
                            60,063,744 bytes free
     C:>_

In this instance, the .COM file FILENAME.COM which is the virus
will be executed and its code will be placed in memory. Once the
code is in memory it will perform the instructions of the virus
author and then look for the file FILENAME.EXE which it will then
execute. Modern scanners have little difficulty finding this type
of virus and they are almost extinct.

A more recent concept used by companion infectors is placing a
copy of the virus in a directory which is closer to the beginning
of the path statement. These viruses are known as Path Companion
Infectors. Transmission of this type of infection from one
computer to another seems to be ineffective because very few
computer users would have their diskette drive on the path
statement. However, embedding this type of virus in dropper
trojans may be an effective means of transmission. None of these
viruses are known to be in the wild at the time of writing.

Worms
-----

Worms are multi-segmented, self-propagating programs with segments
executing on different networked machines. The term also now
includes those self propagating programs that function through
networks.

The most successful worm was the Great Internet Worm of 1988
(author Robert Morris Jnr, Cornell University) which was a UNIX
based program infecting SUN and VAX systems. It used a security
hole in sendmail (Debug Mode) to send commands to the local
command interpreter (a program similar to COMMAND.COM on IBM
Compatible machines). It's success was based on the fact that it
used techniques to hide itself, one of which was deleting the
argument list to hide its operation. The Great Internet Worm
infected up to 6000 machines and cost damage which has been
estimated to be in the region of $50m USA.

Boot Sector Infectors
---------------------

These are by far the most successful of all types of viruses,
especially on IBM compatibles. An explanation of the operation of
a Boot Sector Infector (BSI) is most easily understood out by
examining the operation of old fashioned 'diskette only' machines.
Modern computers that contain hard disks will be dealt with later.

The term "to bootstrap a computer", which means to start a
computer comes from an old saying "to pull yourself up by your own
bootstaps" and is a reasonable description of how computers
actually start up. When a computer starts up, the operating system
is the first thing that is loaded into memory (volatile memory
which only exists while there is power available and is known as
Random Access Memory, or RAM). The computer is an inanimate
object, so it doesn't know which operating system to look for.
This is why the boot sector is very important in the startup
process for computers.

Inside each diskette is a circular magnetic plate which is divided
up into tracks and sectors. Each track is like a concentric ring
on the diskette and each sector is similar to a pie segment.
During the formatting process, DOS may allocate more than one
sector to a cluster. This is due to the size of the available area
for the File Allocation Table (FAT), a data file which is used by
DOS to keep track of the whereabouts of user generated files on
the diskette. This means that a file that would be stored on the
diskette may take up three sectors even if it is less than one
sector in length. The wastage is known as slack. Another part of
the formatting process is the placing of essential control
information on the diskette. This places a small executable file
in the boot sector (at Track 0, Sector 1 ). All diskettes have
this file. It is not visible when a directory listing is taken.
Even though it is not normally visible to the computer user, it's
whereabouts is always in the same place, and is determined by the
location of the drive rotation pin hole on the diskette (turn
over a 3.5" diskette and look to see two holes, one of which is
used to centre the diskette and the other to rotate it in the
drive).

The file is known as the Boot Sector Loader Program (BSLP). One of
it's functions is to provide the familiar error message:

     Non System Diskette
     Replace and press any key to continue

when a data diskette has been inadvertently left in the diskette
drive bay prior to the machine booting. Under normal
circumstances, this is a very sensible error message to provide to
a user. The reaction of the user is to remove the incorrect
diskette, replace it with a bootable diskette, and press any key.

Virus authors recognised the potential of this error message and
wrote small viruses which would, in many instances, move the BSLP
to another part of the diskette, and replace the BSLP with the
virus, so that when the machine attempted to boot from the
infected diskette it would execute the virus code first. Once the
virus code was in memory, and active, it would locate the real
boot sector code and execute it, so that the user would be unaware
of the virus activity. On diskettes, the real BSLP was placed in
an area of the diskette which was then marked as bad, or otherwise
disguised, so that DOS would not attempt to overwrite the valid
code during the normal activity that the diskette is expected to
perform.

Areas of disks being correctly marked as bad result from either
the DOS formatting process, or normal wear and tear on the surface
of the diskette. When formatting a diskette, DOS writes a
character (E6 hex) to all parts of the disk and then reads back
the information to verify that it is valid. It verifies this by
writing a Cyclic Redundancy Check value (CRC) which acts in a
similar way to a parity check in serial communication. When the
read process occurs and the data is in memory, DOS will perform
the CRC to ensure that the read operation has been successful. If
the CRC of the read data is not the same as that listed on the
disk DOS will give a disk read error message and then mark that
sector/cluster as bad. As DOS expects to occasionally find bad
sectors on disks the user is not made aware of the fact that bad
areas exist on the disk. If a diskette has been used many times,
it's ability to store data in all areas might be reduced.
Therefore, when DOS attempts to read valid data from the diskette,
the CRC indicates a failure. DOS will then report a read error.
Utility programs such as the Norton Utilities NDD.EXE, can
retrieve data from corrupted parts of disks, but will generally
mark the area as bad after the retrieval operation has been
completed.

Once the virus is in memory, it will then attempt to infect any
diskette that is placed in the drive bay and accessed (this is not
true for more complex viruses which will test for write protection
prior to attempting an infection thereby making themselves more
difficult to detect).

There are very few systems in use nowadays that do not have hard
disks. When the computer has a hard disk, the above process takes
on a much more devastating threat. Hard disks can not be write
protected in the same way as floppy diskettes. Once a hard disk
has been infected, then every time the machine boots, the virus
is loaded and becomes active, infecting every diskette that it
can.

Another problem is the fact that hard disks have a mechanism
whereby they can be partitioned. This was designed so that more
than one operating system could be used on the same machine. Also,
many computer operators choose to partition large hard disks for
the purpose of storing data in a more logical way, or for the
purpose of reducing the amount of wastage resulting from slack.
The cluster size on hard disks is also dependant on the available
space allotted to the FAT.

Hard disks contain partition information in the Partition Sector
at Track 0, Head 0, Sector 1. Within the Partition Sector, data
is written in the Master Boot Record (MBR) which records the
whereabouts of the Boot Sector that should be used during
bootstrapping. This additional feature allows more scope for virus
authors and further complicates the detection process. It is
important that the infection process is understood so I will
endeavour to explain this process in some length below, even
though this involves some repetition of the text above.

The following is the procedure used by an IBM Compatible PC during
startup, assuming that the PC has a bootable hard disk:

     Power On
     Power On Self Test (diagnostic checking of hardware
                         components, resulting in numerous
                         copyright notices appearing on screen)
          ROM BIOS now invoked
               Keyboard test (lock lights flash)
               Other internal checks
               Check and Validate components recorded in CMOS
               Check if exist Drive A: (light flash)
               Check if exist Drive B:
               Check if exist Drive C: (light flash)
               Check if exist Drive D:
               Test speaker (beep)
               Test other stuff (whirr)

At this point, if anything is wrong, you will get a "Setup
Incorrect" message and an option to either press F1 to continue or
F2 to enter Setup (or something of that nature).

Now it is time to start up the operating system.

     Check if a diskette in Drive A: (fairly big noise)
        if yes, execute Boot Sector Loader Program (BSLP) Drive A:
        if no, read Master Boot Record (MBR) Drive C: to locate
           whereabouts of BSLP on hard disk then execute it.

Whenever the BSLP (otherwise known as the bootstrap loader) is
executed it will test for the existence of the hidden system files
IO.SYS and MSDOS.SYS (or IBMBIO.COM and IBMDOS.COM) on it's own
drive. If these files exist it will read IO.SYS into memory and
then execute a sub program within IO.SYS known as SYSINIT. SYSINIT
then continues the boot process. It will first look for CONFIG.SYS
for configuration purposes. If CONFIG.SYS is not found it will use
it's own default values. Next, SYSINIT loads MSDOS.SYS (contains
system services). The reason for the read of the CONFIG.SYS file
prior to loading MSDOS.SYS is so that user determined
configurations can be provided for. Then last of all, SYSINIT
loads COMMAND.COM (or other designated command line interpreter).
COMMAND.COM then checks for AUTOEXEC.BAT and runs it.

With the above in mind, it is possible to go through the process
of infection by a boot sector virus. First we need to examine what
happens when an ordinary clean non bootable diskette is left in
Drive A:

The ROM BIOS will find the BSLP and execute it. It will search for
the system files and when it doesn't find them, display the
message

     Non System Disk
     Replace and strike any key to continue

At this point the BSLP will relinquish control back to the ROM
BIOS. The user then has the option of removing the disk and either
replacing it with a DOS system disk or allowing the machine to
boot from the hard drive. Once a key has been pressed, the ROM
BIOS will again test Drive A: first. If a floppy is found then the
above process is repeated. If not it will read the MBR Drive C: to
find the BSLP and then execute it.

Now we can examine what happens when an infected diskette is left
in Drive A: during boot up.

Let us assume that the boot sector of the diskette has been
infected by a previously infected machine. During the infection,
it is likely that a copy of the original boot sector has been made
and hidden somewhere on the diskette (this is not always
necessary, there are other modes of operation). The BSLP has been
overwritten by the virus. This is quite easy to do because all
floppy diskette boot sectors are in the same place, ie, Sector 1
track 0 side 0. All the information needed to make the diskette
useable is located in the first few bytes of this area.

Once the ROM BIOS executes what appears to be the BSLP, it has in
fact executed the virus. Once the virus is in memory it can do a
number of things. In many instances, it will execute the copy of
the original BSLP that it made during the original infection
process. This will in turn display the "Non System Disk .."
message. The virus is now in memory but depending on the nature of
the virus, can still be quite harmless. In some instances it may
not infect the hard disk because it needs DOS to be loaded before
it can perform many of its own operations (many use int 21h
services). Again, this is not always the case, and the virus may
be able to infect the machine without assistance from DOS. In many
infections though, it waits for the user to remove the diskette
and press a key. It then allows the ROM BIOS to read the MBR and
load the BSLP of the hard disk. It might even allow operations to
continue right up until after SYSINIT is loaded.

Somewhere along this process, the virus will infect the hard disk
of the machine. It will normally write it's own code to the Master
Boot Record because it is this area of the hard disk that is read
first during a hard disk bootstrap. Some viruses might only write
to the boot sector of the hard disk though this is unusual. Either
method will work, and will result in the virus becoming active in
memory every time the computer is started. Once the computer is
infected, then every diskette, without write protection, that is
placed in Drive A: will become infected.

Many BSI viruses employ stealth techniques to prevent themselves
being discovered. Mainly this involves reporting false information
to DOS and to utilities such as anti-virus TSR Monitoring
programs.

Stealth is a term used to describe many methods that viruses use
to hide themselves. One of the most common is to report that the
machine has only 639Kb of available memory. This will not be
considered as unusual because many computers (eg, IBM PS1) retain
1Kb memory for BASIC ROMs. Other methods include deliberately
reporting false information to requests for DOS services. This is
achieved by taking control of DOS interrupts and calculating the
expected outcome of the request, or passing on the request to DOS.
Some BSI infectors hide themselves in the High Memory Area (HMA).
This will only be discovered if the computer operator changes the
BUFFERS line in the CONFIG.SYS to a value than can be normally
accepted in the HMA but actually forces the buffers into low
memory, though it would be a knowledgeable computer user that
would notice this. Most computer operators will not even be aware
of the loss of memory due to any action by a virus, and will
generally continue to use the machine without further
investigation. We, as computer users, allow ourselves to become
infected because of our ignorance.

The most successful virus ever in the United Kingdom, Form.A, is a
simple BSI. The main reason why it has achieved its success is
because it was originally spread widely by a shareware company on
infected diskettes and because it simply does not work properly.
If a user looks into the virus encyclopedias that accompany
anti-virus packages he/she will find that the description of
Form.A, will tell them that the virus activates on the 18th of
each month causing clicking noises and displaying a derogatory
message concerning a lady named Corrinne. However, this activation
will only take place if the virus is in a machine using a code
page for Austria/Switzerland, ie, 38. In the UK the code page
value that is used is 44 so these effects do not occur. The virus
therefore continues to replicate without the user being aware of
its existence. It effectively does not perform the trojan activity
that it was designed to do. The fault in the information given by
the anti-virus packages is easily excusable. The programmers that
have taken the virus apart simply report what it is designed to
do, then get on with the next virus. This shall be discussed later
in the section on Glut.

Document Infecting Viruses
--------------------------

These are the most recent type of viruses. They utilise the
complex macro languages that are incorporated into modern
application programs. Most of these application programs allow
macros that have been embedded in documents to execute
automatically. This is a feature which can be used to automate
repetitive tasks. However, this feature can also be used to
support replicating code. In the macro viruses that have been seen
to date, the virus code overwrites the default document settings
thereby infecting all documents that are modified or created using
that application program.

There is no reason to suspect that this will be the only method
used to infect documents. There are probably other viable methods.
Also, the viruses that have been written to date, are not
particularly sophisticated. Indeed, the Winword.Nuclear virus
attempts to drop a conventional virus into the computer, but fails
because it is unable to escape from it's current window. A little
more thought towards the development of this activity by the
author might have resulted in a viable method of dropping the
conventional virus.

Other Types of Infection Mechanisms
-----------------------------------

Many viruses do not fall easily into the above categories. In
fact, many of them cross the boundaries of the above definitions.
A good example of this is the Tequila virus which can attack
systems both as a program file infector and as a BSI. This type of
virus is known as a multi-partite virus.

There are viruses which are known as file system or cluster
viruses. These viruses, eg, DIR II, and Byway, modify directory
table entries in the FAT so that the virus is loaded and executed
before the desired program is. Note that the program itself is not
physically altered, only the directory entry is. Some consider
these infectors to be a separate category of viruses, while others
consider them to be a sub-category of the program file infectors.

The experimental Whale virus can be described as all, or none of
the above. Viruses which affect other operating systems use
entirely different attack mechanisms to those described above. In
general, if there is a way to get code loaded into memory that is
not immediately perceivable by the user, then the virus author
will try to exploit it. Not all vulnerabilities have been attacked
though; there are still a considerable number of avenues open
to the virus author to exploit.


     Operating Systems
     =================

This section attempts to deal with the way in which known viruses
infect popular operating systems.

IBM Compatible PCs
------------------

These are the most common personal computers on the planet. Users
generally have to know a bit about the operating system in order
to make them work properly. This necessary acquisition of
knowledge means that they are the target for most virus authors
(who have become knowledgeable about this type of system). Many of
the attack mechanisms have been described in the section above.
There are known to be in excess of 7000 viruses that have been
written for the IBM Compatible PC.

One of the main reasons why this type of system has been targeted
so much is the fact that there is generally a requirement to
provide backward compatibility when the operating system or
hardware is advanced. This is due to the large numbers of business
users that require their existing software to run on more modern
hardware. Virus authors are interested in the longevity of their
creations, so this system is by far the most attractive target.

Another reason was originally the availability of the machines to
youths. Many viruses have been written on machines that have been
made redundant by companies and then given out to the parents of
the virus authors. Older IBM machines were not very powerful and
entertaining software was either not available or was unable to
run on the machines. Youths that became interested in the machines
started to write viruses.

Many viruses, especially the older ones, originated in Eastern
Europe, mainly Bulgaria, which is the equivalent of Silicon Valley
to the former Eastern Bloc nations. IBM Compatibles were really
the only affordable type of equipment to people in these
countries.

Macintosh PCs
-------------
The Apple Macintosh family of computers work around the Motorola
MC680x0 family of CPU's.  The exception being the PowerMac range,
these are powered by the Motorola PowerPC RISC CPU.  Having a
different CPU makes these machines resilient to the viruses which
plague the Intel 80x86 based computers (PC's), but that doesn't
mean viruses do not exist for Macs, they do and some are more
virulent than those found on PC's.

Executable files on the Macintosh (Mac) consist of two areas (or
forks), the data fork and the resource fork. The resource fork
contains a variety of resources of varying types containing a wide
range of executable code and associated configuration information
in a highly structured form. Examples of resources include window
definition code, data strings, icons, patches and "init" start-up
code.

The following list indicates those Mac code resources for a
pre-System 7 operating system that have been used by virus
writers:

     CDEF      Control Definition Function;
     MDEF      Menu Definition Code;
     CODE      Application Code;
     FKEY      Function Key Code;
     INIT      Initialisation Routine;
     WDEF      Window Definition Function;
     CDEV      Control Panel Device.

Mac viruses can be grouped by the objects modified, and by the
means of modification. Key objects include the system file (which
contains the key resources comprising the operating system),
system folder entries (containing supplementary INIT, CDEV and
other code at start-up), desktop (containing icons, bundles and
other information associated with active disks and folders) and
the application resource forks themselves. The desktop was
restructured in System 7, making desktop viruses such as WDEF and
CDEF obsolete.

This possibility of change in the operating system is a deterrent
to a virus writer who wants his creation to exist as long as
possible. Indeed the prospect of change may have been the major
deterrent against the production of MicroSoft Windows specific
viruses on the IBM Compatible, although a few are known to exist.

A curiosity infection concerning the early nVIR A and nVIR B
strains was that they would search for each other within the
infected machine. If they found each other they would combine to
produce a new strain of virus which will be a hybrid of the
resources contained in each strain, containing CODE resources
from one strain and nVIR resources from the second. At first
glance it appears that this might be construed as procreative
activity but this is not the case. It is simply the swapping of
complete component parts that are viable alternatives for the
functionality of the virus code.

Many virus authors claim that their creations are artificial life.
I do not subscribe to this point of view because viruses do not
compete for common resources (a possible contradiction to this is
in the section on Others below) in the same way that organisms do.
Neither do they evolve. There have been instances of mutation and
corruption of viruses due to particular circumstances within a
specific computer setup. However, these mutations will generally
render the code inoperable. No computer virus has ever shown any
propensity for evolution. Even artificial intelligence systems
have never shown any capability in the area of evolution;
primarily, they do not even contain replicating elements.

UNIX
----

Does malicious software exist for the UNIX platform? The answer is
yes and no. There are research virus strains that were created by
Fred Cohen and binary viruses by Tom Duff. Also there is the Great
Internet Worm which was written by Robert Morris Jnr. UNIX like
any other operating system is susceptible to virus code. The main
reason why there is a void is because virus authors normally do
not have the resources to run UNIX systems at home. There are
"in house" trojans that have been found.

Recently, the availability of the free Linux operating system, a
variant of UNIX makes viruses in the UNIX environment much more
likely. Authors now have a means to explore the operating system.

Novell
------

The Novell corporation is quite secretive about how it's operating
system works and this, along with the resource needs mentioned for
UNIX above, has meant that very few viruses have been written
specifically to attack it. The most notable virus that has been
targeted at Novell systems was discovered in August/September 1994
and is known as the No-Smoking virus. This virus uses DOS services
to extract information regarding users from the server. It's
payload is the sending of messages from one user to another
namely:

                Friday I'm in Love!

        or      No Smoking, please! Thanks.

Obviously this could create a considerable amount of confusion
among the users of a network. There is no reason to believe that
this virus is not the first of many, and it does create problems
for Novell who are presently attempting to obtain both C2 and E2
Security Classifications for the next release of Novell Netware
Version 4.+

It should also be noted that claims were made by members of the
audience, during a Novell related seminar at the Annual Virus
Bulletin Conference in 1994 that the execute only flag can be
compromised. This was reported to the public at large in the
December 1994 issue of PC Plus magazine.

There is reason to believe that a number of companies that sell
backup software for Novell systems have been able to undermine
some of the protection within the Novell operating system. They
have found this to be necessary because of over zealous network
administrators who have restricted access to files to such an
extent that the backup process can not function properly.

Others
------

Amiga computers have a considerable number of viruses which are
notable for their apparent anti-virus behaviour, where the virus
attempts to seek out and destroy other viruses on the host
machine. These are the only viruses that appear to compete for
resources, yet they are long way for being classified as being
alive. Most viruses for these machines have been written in
Western Countries where the machines are mainly used either as
games platforms, or professionally, for image editing.

Atari computers have a boot process which is similar to IBM
Compatible PCs and suffer the consequences of similar BSI type
infections.

Multi Platform Viruses
----------------------

One of the consequences of the development in standardisation of
application programming interfaces (APIs) is the possibility that
viruses can be written which can cross platforms. The second area
of emergent standards is the application binary interfaces (ABIs).
ABIs allow binary compatibility across platforms. An example of
this is the ability to port Intel code to run via an emulator
under Sun Microsystems Solaris 2.3 using the Windows ABI (WABI).
WABI allows sophisticated Windows applications such as WordPerfect
to be run under Solaris.

Examples of emulator viruses were encountered on the Atari ST when
running one of the prevalent Apple Mac emulators. The Aladin and
Frankie ST viruses were detected as long ago as 1987.

As stated earlier, document infecting viruses do not require a
specific operating system on which to run. They rely on the
environment that is provided by the application program. If the
targeted application program can run on more than one operating
system, then there is nothing to prevent the virus from moving
freely between these operating systems.


     Prevention, Protection and Control, A Policy Issue
     ==================================================

General Overview
----------------

Computer viruses do not know about the difference between private
non-commercial computer users and corporate institutions. They
will attack either system with the same indiscriminate ferocity.
However, it is important to recognise that the means by which
countermeasures are employed and the approaches used are
considerably different in these environments.

Countermeasures in the Corporate Environment
--------------------------------------------

Every organisation should have a policy or a list of procedures to
protect their data. Part of this "policy" should include
countermeasures to prevent attack and infection by computer
viruses. There is an obligation in the UK under the Data
Protection Act for holders of data on individuals to ensure that
the data is correct and available. The activity of viruses may
prohibit the availability or undermine the integrity of data. The
procedures below are aimed almost entirely at IBM Compatible
machines.

  Cost Effective Prevention Methods

Common sense approaches to the resolution of all problems will
generally be the most effective and will also cost the least.
These are mainly concerned with the utilisation of the resources
that are already available. I have listed below, some general
procedures which can be adopted by almost any corporate user of
computers.

1.   Check to find out whether the CMOS on the machine has a
     setting which will permit the boot process to ignore the
     diskette drive. If this is set, the machine will
     automatically be immune to infection by BSI (not
     multi-partite) viruses. This is significant in that 90% of
     successful virus infections are all BSI. This action alone
     will reduce potential infections by over 90%.

2.   Only permit authorised software to run on the machine.
     Authorised software means ONLY the software that is required
     for the user to perform his/her job. This should not be
     confused with legally licensed software. Even if the
     organisation has a licence for software that it no longer
     needs, remove it from the machine. Unlicensed software should
     be removed and destroyed. All users should be made aware that
     they will be disciplined if unauthorised software is found on
     their machine.

3.   Ensure that all machines have the BIOS "Power On" password
     set. This will prevent access to the machines by unauthorised
     users.

4.   Format all new floppy disks coming into the company /
     organisation using the /U (unconditional) switch. This
     includes pre-formatted diskettes which can optionally be
     quick-formatted using the /Q switch. Make the formatting
     facility available as a selectable menu option or icon so
     that it can be controlled.

5.   Test hard disks for unauthorised executables during the boot
     process, and if any are found, lock the user out of the
     machine. Sophisticated software can be obtained to do this
     automatically.

6.   Restrict all access to the command line, or file management
     facilities that are normally available to the user.

  Cost Effective Monitoring Methods

1.   Make copies of executable files, eg, copy WP.EXE to WP.CHK
     and periodically run a file comparison between the two files,
     ie,

          FC WP.EXE WP.CHK

     which will show up differences that may have been caused by
     most virus activity.

2.   Ensure that IT managers scan machines periodically with up to
     date anti-virus software to verify that they are free from
     infection and then take copies of the Boot Sector, Partition
     Sector, and CMOS settings. This can be done by using either
     Norton Utilities or Central Point's PC Tools to make a rescue
     diskette. It should be noted that Norton Utilities for the
     Mac can be used to create rescue diskettes for that platform.
     Many anti-virus applications can also be used to create
     rescue diskettes, good examples are Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus
     Toolkit, Thunderbyte, and VET.

3.   Once a machine has been verified as clean from infection, and
     a rescue disk has been created, copy the AUTOEXEC.BAT and
     CONFIG.SYS files to the rescue diskette (it is wise to rename
     these files to AUTOEXEC.BAK and CONFIG.BAK to prevent the
     rescue diskette from running programs from the hard disk
     during an emergency bootstrap). Some DOS files should also be
     copied when space is available on the diskette. This should
     include a small text editor such as EDLIN.EXE (Note, DOS's
     EDIT.COM will not work without QBASIC.EXE being present and
     this is a large file which will occupy unnecessary space on a
     rescue diskette), SYS.COM, FDISK.EXE, FORMAT.COM, CHKDSK.EXE,
     ATTRIB.EXE, FC.EXE, etc. These files can be used to clear
     viruses from an infected machine.

     EDLIN.EXE may be unfamiliar to staff who have only used DOS
     Ver 5 and above and may be too difficult to use. There are
     many public domain editors that can be downloaded from local
     BBS systems.

4.   Rather than disposing of old computers, it would be better to
     keep at least one of them to act as a dirty machine. This
     machine can be used as the scanning platform for new
     diskettes when they arrive into the office environment. When
     selecting which old computer to keep for this process, verify
     that the write protection pin is working on the computer.
     This can be done by write protecting a diskette and then
     attempting to copy a file to the diskette. If the copy
     process fails, then the write protection pin is functioning
     normally.

5.   All computers should have their write protection pin tested
     before authorised use. Should the need arise to boot from a
     write protected boot diskette, and the pin is inoperable,
     then the default is write enabled. An infection on such a
     machine could then result in the contamination of the
     anti-virus diskettes.

6.   If the corporation is large and can afford a test machine,
     ie, an up to date model that can run current software
     applications, then this should be set up and controlled by
     the appropriate member of staff. This machine should test all
     incoming software for the maximum amount of time possible.
     This machine should have integrity checking anti-virus
     software installed, and this should then be run periodically
     to validate that the software under test is not behaving in
     an unusual manner.

7.   Perform the maximum amount of scanning possible after any
     system has been repaired by a maintenance contractor.

  Risk Analysis

Corporations should use Risk Analysis techniques to identify the
possible consequences of infection on systems. If the cost of
protection outweighs the risk then management may elect to take
the risk. Yes, computer viruses like all other business matters
cost money. However, the cost of protection is generally minimal
and therefore it would be highly unusual that there would be
systems without some form of anti-virus protection.

There are many computer consultants that can provide this type of
analysis. Even though it is a costly exercise, advice from a risk
analysis may well save the corporation from other disasters which
are more significant than a virus infection.

  Funding the Protection

If the money is available to run anti-virus software on all of the
machines continually, a situation which I would strongly recommend
(I would not recommend the use of the MS DOS anti-virus software
that is free with DOS Ver 6+), then considerable thought should go
into what anti virus products to use.

Primarily, there should be a standard package which is running on
all users machines (I use F-Prot for this task), which should be
backed up by another reputable package (I use Dr Solomon's
Anti-Virus Toolkit, Thunderbyte, and AVP). Both the main package
and the backup package(s) should be easy to use from a bootable
DOS diskette (it doesn't really matter how nice their Windows
interface is). It is extremely important that the packages use
similar virus names. The products I use do try to do this, but
when new viruses appear there is generally a delay in
standardising the name. The main reason why the naming standards
should be the same is so that an identified infection can be
validated. Scanning for viruses has become an extremely
complicated process and False Positive Identifications are more
common than infections. Also, there is the problem that the user
may perceive an epidemic of infection if both products are
reporting different names for the same virus.

Make the time available for at least one user to learn how to use
the software properly. This is the most expensive part of
anti-virus protection, but it is the by far the most important.
Not only should that user be proficient in using the software, but
he/she will also have to identify an external expert advice
source, in case of an emergency. A good example of the reason for
this is to consider infections by Form.A and Ripper.A (alias Jack
the Ripper). Both are BSI viruses, and both are in the wild in the
UK. Both can be easily identified by any of the reputable
anti-virus software packages. The difference is in the effects of
both viruses. One, ie, Form.A is almost benign and causes little
damage, the other, ie, Ripper.A is a data diddler (slowly corrupts
data) type virus that corrupts data by changing write values about
every one thousand disk writes. As both viruses can be removed
easily using methods described in the disinfection section below,
the user may believe that the infection is over, when in fact
their lack of knowledge may permit a backup overwrite of the last
remaining valid data backup tape.

Selection of the "expert" user can be a complicated task.
Primarily, this individual should have some expertese in the
understanding of computer systems. Also, he/she should be a good
communicator, and be at ease when addressing groups of people.
This individual should ultimately provide awareness training to
all staff in the organisation. Another role for this individual is
the gathering and distribution of awareness posters and
documentation. It should be remembered that the average cost of a
virus infection is in the region of 4000 UK pounds (approx $ 6000
USA).

Another reason to obtain external advice during an infection is
the fact that over 90% of companies that become infected by a
virus are re-infected by the same virus within thirty days. One of
the reasons for this is that many users keep personal information
on their own diskettes which may not be made available during the
clean up process. Awareness training will prevent this because
users will be knowledgeable enough to ensure that their own
diskettes are handed in during the clean up process.

Finally, the last reason to have an "expert contact" would be to
deal with false positive identifications.

Realistically, the expert contact should be the anti-virus vendor
that sold the anti-virus software to the corporation in the first
place. Good vendors will keep in contact with the purchasing
officer and will advise them about developments in the area of
computer viruses.

Finally, good control of incoming and outgoing data means that the
users might only be expected to scan diskettes that come into
their possession. This can again be provided as an automated
procedure as a menu option or an icon.

Countermeasures in the Home Environment
---------------------------------------

The home computer user takes on all the roles associated with the
continuity of the operation of their computer. In most instances,
this means a significant learning process.

The following countermeasures are easy to implement by normal
computer users without these individuals having to understand the
complex operations involved within the operating system. I have
only been a computer user four four years, and I do not fully
understand all the vulnerabilities associated with computer
systems, yet I am reasonably confident that I can protect my
computer against virus infection.

1.   Check to see if the CMOS can be set to boot from the hard
     disk instead of the default setting of booting from the
     diskette drive. Information on how to access the CMOS will
     be available in the manual that was delivered along with the
     computer system when it was purchased.

     By performing this action, at least 90% of the threat to the
     system will be eradicated. It does not provide a remedy for
     90% of viruses, because most viruses are program file
     infectors. It just happens that the most successful viruses
     are boot sector infectors.

2.   Prohibit or diminish the threat to the original software
     diskettes. This means that the write protection tab should be
     clipped to the position where there is a hole that can be
     seen through. This can be a problem with some software, in
     that during the installation process, some application
     programs require a write to the diskette to prevent illegal
     copying.

     Should this be a problem, do not be persuaded to remove the
     write protection tab as an initial solution; instead, allow
     the installation to fail and then attempt to make a copy of
     the diskette in question. Obviously, some diskettes have been
     configured to prevent this action, again to prevent illegal
     copying, but it is worthwhile attempting to perform this
     action anyway.

3.   Choose a reliable anti-virus software program and install it
     on to the computer (do not rely on the anti-virus software
     that comes supplied with DOS, it is not good enough quality,
     and it is out of date). Keep this software up to date, and
     use it to scan all incoming programs whether they be on
     diskette, CDROM or downloaded via modem.

4.   Read the anti-virus software manual carefully and make a
     rescue diskette if the product provides this facility. Always
     keep rescue diskettes separate from other transient diskettes.

5.   Make data backups. It has become virtually impossible to make
     complete backups of computer systems because the application
     programs continue to grow in size. It is only a fortunate few
     who can afford a tape backup system for a home computer.

     Data backups mean that data creation should be carefully
     considered, ie, the creation of suitable directories where
     data can be stored.

     A home computer that is used to run a small business must
     have some form of tape or other backup device fitted to the
     computer system whereby the complete system can be backed up.
     Not only should this equipment be purchased and installed,
     but the backup procedure should be carried out rigourously.

6.   Once the user has become acquainted with the operation of the
     computer, ie, knowledgable about the difference between
     programs and data, then establish an integrity checking
     archive using the chosen anti-virus software product.

     It is preferrable that this archive is stored on a diskette
     rather than on the machine. When considering which anti-virus
     product to buy, ask the vendor whether this is available with
     the product under consideration.

7.   Periodically scan the computer's hard disk for viruses. This
     involves booting from write protected clean DOS diskettes
     prior to running the scan, which should preferably be done
     from a write protected diskette.

8.   Never be in a rush to obtain the latest software, especially
     software that is available for download. Always allow some
     time to elapse prior to testing software. This is especially
     true of diskettes that accompany computer magazines. There
     have been seven instances of viruses being distributed in
     European computer magazines in 1994/1995.

9.   Exercise some control over who has access to the computer.
     Obviously, the system will have been bought to benefit all of
     the family. Nevertheless, encourage children to leave all
     diskettes that they might have traded in the school
     playground in the scanning tray. Try not to delegate the
     scanning task. Make it one of the rules for the right of
     access to the system that all diskettes are validated by
     yourself. You, as the owner of the computer are responsible
     for it's contents, so it is you who must test and validate
     all software that is to be loaded onto the system.

10.  Try and find a contact who can be aproached at a time of
     emergency. This is not necessarily the same person that would
     normally be contacted after a hardware, or software
     installation problem. Many anti-virus products are shareware
     (even freeware for non-commercial use) and there may not be a
     vendor to turn to in times of emergency. Freeware products
     can not be expected to be supported.

     The best place to turn to is probably the BBS SysOp should
     advice be required. Many SysOps are probably not experts in
     the field of computer viruses, but they are likely to be able
     to point you in the right direction. This may involve calling
     in someone that requires payment for a service, but by doing
     this earlier rather than later can save considerable problems
     later on.


     Locating and Eradicating
     ========================

There is a considerable difference between the identification and
the eradication of a virus infection. It should also be remembered
that an attempted attack by a virus is not an infection. This
section is dedicated almost solely to IBM Compatible machines.
Other platforms have a lesser volume of viruses and consequently
have less risk of infection. Nevertheless, the basic control over
incoming and outgoing data is still equally important.

Commercial Anti-Virus Packages
------------------------------

Most commercial anti-virus software packages have four components
which are made up by a TSR monitor, a scanner, an integrity
checker and a disinfector.

  TSR Monitor

A Terminate and Stay Resident program (a program that is generally
loaded during startup and continues to run during the current
session on the computer) can be used to perform a number of
processes. These programs can check for virus like behaviour in
memory. One of the most effective methods used by these monitors
is to validate the contents of files as they are executed or
copied. Indeed, they are very reliable at finding BSI infected
diskettes. This is done by checking through data that is copied
into RAM when a floppy disk is accessed.

The Boot Sector and FAT of the diskette is copied into the memory
area just above DOS when the diskette is being accessed. The
monitor can then check this data and identify BSI infections on
the diskette. It should be noted that the process of copying this
data from the diskette by DOS will not cause an infection because
the program in the boot sector is not executed. Viruses can only
replicate after they have been executed. Up until they have been
executed, the program code is just data.

Many TSR monitor programs are capable of identifying the more
common viruses in the wild. Obviously, they can not be expected to
protect against all viruses because they would become too large,
and that would be restrictive on the resources of the computer.

  Scanner

The scanner is an incredible piece of software engineering. Most
have been written using proprietary dedicated languages which have
been independently created by the company involved. Scanners
generally validate themselves prior to operation, then check
through memory to make sure that no suspicious activity is taking
place prior to checking through the files on the disk. In many
ways the scanner is the most important part of the package in that
it is much more comprehensive in it's ability to detect viruses
than the monitor program.

The scanner should be used periodically on each machine and every
diskette, including shrink wrapped software diskettes, which
should also be scanned prior to allowing software from those
diskettes to gain access to any machine. It is preferable that a
scanner is used on a dirty machine as discussed above.

Scanning a diskette from a clean hard disk is acceptable. However,
periodic scanning of the hard disk should be performed by booting
from a clean, write protected diskette. This will ensure that no
stealth virus is in memory thereby compromising the scan.

Anti-virus vendors are in a constant race against each other in
order to keep their scanner up to date. Software comparisons in
computer magazines always compare the detection rate of scanners
and generally disregard the monitors and the integrity checkers.
These reviews also seem to concentrate on the speed of the
product. Realistically, speed comparisons should not be considered
as a significant reason to buy one scanner as opposed to another
product. Most scanning will be performed on diskettes, and it is
the speed of the diskette drive that has most influence on the
duration of the operation. Computer journalists are not experts on
computer viruses. Indeed, their normal criteria for evaluating
software generally concerns the analysis of the potential
productivity of software. Anti-virus software does not fall into
this category, and reviews are normally flawed.

  Heuristic Scanning

Most modern anti-virus software packages will have an option
within the scanner that provides an heuristic analysis of the
programs on the target diskette or hard disk. Heuristic scanning
is basically an intelligent analysis of the machine code in
executable files. This is different to the identification by
comparing known portions of virus code. Many uninfected programs
will have code that may be identified by the scanner as being
suspicious and programs that are clean might be flagged as being
suspicious. This can lead the user to believe that they have a
virus infection when there is none.

Where programs have been flagged as being suspicious, it is best
to increase the useage of the integrity checking facility within
the anti-virus software. This will validate whether an infection
has taken place.

Although the possibility of false positive identification of
infection seems to be a greater hinderance than a help, it is a
viable method to employ to identify previously unknown viruses.
It's greatest benefit is in the analysis of new software coming in
to the system. If the executables are flagged as being suspicious,
then do not run the software. Leave it for a while until you can
verify that the software is free of infection from another source.
Contacting the original author of the software and explaining what
has happened might result in the response that the software
company is already aware of the problem and have already contacted
the anti-virus vendor.

Software houses do not want their software to be flagged as
suspicious, so they will be very interested in any report of such
an incident.

  Integrity Checkers

These programs evaluate files on the disk and write data files
containing information about them. The data files can be similar
to a list of CRC values (mentioned above) and in the better
products, allow this data to be stored on a diskette. By storing
this data on a diskette it is possible to prevent a virus from
tampering with the integrity data.

Some products base their protection on integrity checking, and in
the final analysis, this is probably the safest form of protection
for a computer system. However, evaluating an integrity check
generally requires some knowledge on behalf of the user of the
product. This may well be beyond the capability of many computer
users.

On procurement of a product, make sure that there is an integrity
checking option available, even though this might not be used
fully until knowledge of the operation of the system is understood
by the user.

  Disinfectors

In general, all of the reputable packages are good at detecting
viruses, particularly those viruses known to be in the wild. Most
viruses are not in the wild for various reasons, they are badly
written and can not really survive very well, they have not been
lucky in distribution, etc. Once a virus has been detected, the
disinfection part of the software comes into play. Many of the
packages incorporate the disinfector into the scanner.

Many viruses can not be disinfected properly by these programs
because some viruses irretrievably corrupt the programs during
infection. Sometimes, the disinfection process will not work, even
when the disinfection is claimed by the vendor. This can happen
because viruses are modified by other authors, and the scanner may
have incorrectly identified the infection. It is best to find out
as much as possible about the virus before attempting
disinfection.

Disinfection is really only acceptable for the eradication of
boot sector infections. It is always better to restore good copies
of infected programs from original (clean) software diskettes.

Realistically, the only point where a disinfector becomes
essential is when the computer is in transit, such as a portable
(laptop) computer. The user of this system may not be able to
carry around clean copies of the original software, so the quality
of the disinfector should become a more important topic for
consideration.


     What to do when an infection is suspected
     =========================================

1.   Don't Panic!

2.   Validate the infection using another anti-virus product, if
     possible.

3.   Evaluate the damage, if any, that has been done by the virus.

4.   Report the incident to the Metropolitan Police and they will
     tell you whether they require a sample of the virus.

5.   If a sample should be taken, ask for advice or get help from
     a knowledgable source.

     Normally the user can capture the virus on diskette by
     performing the following actions:

          format a diskette using the infected system;

          copy several .EXE programs to the diskette, ensuring
          that they are programs that are used regularly, and also
          ensuring that there is a variation in the size of the
          programs, ie, one below 10K, one between 10K and 50K and
          one greater than 50K in size;

          copy several .COM programs to the diskette, using the
          same criteria as the .EXE programs;

          copy some .OVL files if any can be found on the system;

          copy a couple of new .EXE (Windows .EXE files) on to the
          diskette as well.

6.   Look up what available information is available in the
     anti-virus software manual (or on-line database) and decide
     whether you are capable of dealing with the virus infection
     independently.

     If you are not happy that you can deal with the infection,
     then obtain advice from a knowledgeable source. Do not assume
     that a shop assistant in a computer store will be able to
     help.

7.   Prior to taking any cleansing action, try to identify the
     source of the infection. This is very important because it
     may well save you having to go through the whole procedure
     again in a few weeks time.

8.   Perform the disinfection ensuring that the process extends to
     all machines and diskettes that have possibly been in contact
     with the infected machine. This must be thorough, in many
     instances, this process can find other infections, especially
     in diskettes holding BSI viruses.

     Disinfection is preferrably performed by replacing infected
     programs with clean originals. Only attempt to use the
     disinfection capability of the anti-virus software as the
     last option available.

As stated above, it may not be possible for the anti-virus
software to adequately disinfect a machine. In many instances this
can be very confusing for the user. The best example of this is
BSI infections. If the infection is on a diskette then most of the
commercial packages can remove it in an instant. This is not the
same for infected hard disks though. It is best to check the
information available from the manual or the anti-virus database.

Should the infection be caused by an unknown virus, the anti-virus
product might not permit a disinfection. If this is the case, then
for program file infecting viruses, a restore from backup is the
only option. In cases of BSI infections of the hard disk, it is
possible to remove unknown viruses using programs that are already
available on the original DOS diskettes.

FDISK is used to create and remove partitions on the hard disk.
Any virus that has overwritten the Master Boot Record (located in
the partition sector) can be eradicated using FDISK. A serious
word of warning though, if the C: drive can not be accessed after
booting from a clean DOS diskette, do not use FDISK to attempt to
remove the infection. Some viruses encrypt important information
used by DOS and removal of the virus by overwriting will render
the contents of the hard disk as being irretrievable.

If C: can be accessed, change to the hard disk and validate the
contents of the directories prior to cleansing. Some viruses have
been known to encrypt data areas of the hard disk instead of the
important areas used by DOS. Should this have happened, the
utilisation of defragmentation after the machine has been booted
with the virus in memory might be a suitable method of regaining
access to the data.

If all is well on C: then FDISK /MBR can be used to overwrite the
infected Master Boot Record. The /MBR switch has remained as an
undocumented feature of FDISK up until DOS Ver 6.1 so this feature
should only be used as a last resort.

The program SYS.COM can be used to eradicate infections in the
boot sector of the infected hard disk. The command is SYS C: which
will transfer operating system files to the hard disk and
overwrite the boot sector with new data.

A word of caution. The above paragraphs are generalisations that
do not always apply, a good example would be an infection by the
Exebug.A virus which writes to the CMOS thereby setting the
machine to boot only from the hard disk. Even when booting from a
write protected diskette, the machine is still infected. This is
done by checking for a bootable diskette in the A: drive after the
virus has loaded into memory. If a bootable floppy is present the
virus instructs the boot sequence to operate from the floppy
drive. The user then believes that the machine has booted from the
diskette. Because of the stealth characteristics of the virus, the
user may think that the machine is being disinfected when in
reality it is not. This virus is discussed at length in the
article entitled "The Death of the Clean Boot" by Iolo Davidson,
in Virus News International, April 1993.

Overall, find out as much about the virus prior to attempting to
remove it. The manual for the chosen anti-virus product, and it's
on board database are probably the best places to start.


     Prospects for the Future
     ========================

The Glut
--------

The Glut is a term introduced to the field by Vesselin Bontchev in
a paper presented to the 4th International Virus Bulletin
Conference on the 8th September 1994. He is Bulgarian and is
widely regarded as one of the world's foremost authorities on
computer viruses. He has one of the largest collection of computer
viruses in the world.

The following is a brief record of the contents of his paper (some
parts of the text are quoted directly while others are
paraphrased):

The main observable problem with virus creation is volume.
Although, statistically speaking the curve of virus creation is no
longer exponential there are still three or four new viruses every
day. This volume creates a number of problems for authors of
scanning software.

1.   It is now impossible for a new anti-virus company to enter
     the field, because, by the time it would take for them to
     research existing known viruses there would be so many new
     viruses that they would always be two years behind the
     competition.

 This observation has now been proven to be incorrect. AVP has
 come to prominence in the last year.

2.   A number of virus authoring packages are now widely
     available, ie, application programs that create viruses on
     behalf of the user (virus author).

 This observation holds true.

3.   Unscrupulous individuals, notably Mark Ludwig, author of the
     Little Black Book of Computer Viruses, are selling thousands
     of viruses on CDROMs.

 It has been over a year since the CDROM became available, and
 there is no statistical confirmation available regarding a
 significant increase in the number of infections that can be
 attributed to the circulation of the CDROM.

4.   It is possible that a Virus Mutator application could be
     developed. This would be an application program that could be
     fed with existing viruses and then recreate the virus in a
     new form. This is a natural extension to the development of
     the authoring packages described above, and other trends.

 There is no evidence to suggest that such an application program
 is under development yet.

5.   Targeted attacks on anti-virus products have become the norm.
     Many viruses now look for the presence of known anti-virus
     packages and perform an activity which will disable the
     scanners, monitors, etc. These viruses are commonly known as
     the anti anti-virus viruses.

 This is the main reason why scanning should be performed from a
 write protected diskette. It is also the reason why integrity
 data should be held on diskette.

6.   Polymorphism is reaching a stage were it is becoming very
     difficult to detect without the scanning engines slowing down
     considerably.

 AVP has proved to be a successful product without the old
 fashioned notion that speed is all important.

7.   LAN Awareness has recently been discovered with hackers
     producing two programs that demonstrate holes in Novell
     Netware, eg, Knock and Hack.

 This shows the need for greater awareness among system
 supervisors for protection against virus attack.

8.   Viruses being used as weapons. Some countries are reportedly
     researching the possibility of using viruses as a weapon
     against other countries. This is disconcerting because the
     end product would be very much more powerful than a virus
     cobbled together by a youth on limited resources.

 All countries should probably explore all methods available to
 protect themselves at a time of conflict. Strategic use of
 trojans is probably a better method of inflicting damage on an
 enemy. The replicating aspect of computer viruses always means
 that there are methods available to discover their activity.

9.   The employment of hardware level stealth as implemented in
     the Russian virus Strange.A.

 I do not know fully understand how this virus works so I am
 unable to comment on this observation.

10.  Greater use of the Commander-Bomber technique of infection is
     easily possible. The virus author Dark Avenger has made this
     technique available to other virus writers. It infects only
     .COM files but instead of placing the main body of the virus
     code at the end of the file it scrambles it through all parts
     of the program without causing the program to crash during
     operation. Commander-Bomber uses a high level of
     polymorphism.

 There has been no significant expansion of this technique over
 the intervening period.

11.  Slow Multi-partite Stealth Polymorphic Viruses are now being
     produced.

 The name says it all.

12.  The naming of viruses itself. This may seem unusual, but if
     you consider that the virus list must be available for the
     purposes of identification within the scanners then this will
     become a serious problem because all the information required
     to perform the scanning operation will not be able to be held
     on a single diskette.

 There is evidence that the virus authors are deliberately sending
 many viruses directly to the anti-virus community just in order
 to keep them occupied. It is a "never mind the quality, feel the
 width"  scenario. However, Dr Solomon's Anti-virus Toolkit is now
 distributed on two diskettes, and this has caused no
 deterioration in sales.

The most significant event that has occurred since the seminar on
Glut has been the occurrence of document infecting viruses. These
probably pose more of threat than the suggestions above. At the
time of writing, document infecting viruses have not displayed any
significant trojan activity, but it is quite possible that these
viruses will become destructive.

The above shows that even one of the world's experts in this field
finds it difficult to predict what will happen in the near future
let alone the long term. Basically, virus production occurs in
little paradigms. Virus authors tend to pick up new ideas then
develop them to their most sophisticated state. Few virus authors
seem to seek out new vulnerabilities, but tend to develop existing
concepts instead.


     The Virus Authors
     =================

Spotty kids in anoraks is the widely conceived impression that
most computer users have of virus authors. How far from the truth
is this, and how much will a knowledge of the virus writers help
in the prevention of the creation of new viruses?

In some instances, the above impression is correct. This is
especially true of the Computer Underground (CU) in the United
Kingdom. The ARCV Group mentioned earlier were basically young men
with little to do. The main difference between them and other
young men is that they have an interest in computers. Other young
men hang around street corners being young men, taking part in
occasional unruly behaviour, eg, vandalism. ARCV did not write any
particularly interesting viruses and relied mainly on a virus
engine supplied to them by Aristotle who ran a BBS called Black
Axis in the USA. The timely arrest and the prosecution of Apache
Warrior has hopefully put an end to their virus writing
activities. As with other young men, they will grow up, get
married, get a job and will not have the time available to write
computer viruses.

This group is not truly representative of virus authoring groups
around the world. Most of them have an accomplished authors as
members and a coordinator as their leader. Most have created their
own virus engine. They tend to remain connected to their own
groups and until recently did not mix much with other virus
groups. This has now changed, and many groups are in constant
contact with each other via the Internet.

I have briefly outlined below some of the main virus authoring
groups and their achievements.

1.   Phalcon/Skism - This is North American based. At one time
     this group had members in Canada, but it is now based in New
     York, with only one Canadian member, who is known as Memory
     Lapse. They produce a well known newsletter called 40-Hex,
     which is widely regarded as one of the best. The leadership
     is Garbage Heap (Gheap) and the best known author is Dark
     Angel. Dark Angel wrote an excellent series of articles on
     how to write viruses called "Dark Angels Phunky Virus Writing
     Guide" and also wrote the PS-Mass Produced Code Generator
     (PS-MPC) application program which is perhaps the best virus
     authoring package known.

2.   Nuke - North America, South Africa and Australia. Produce the
     newsletter Nuke Infojournal. The leadership is/was Rock
     Steady, Nowhere Man and Aristotle. A major split occurred in
     the early nineties with factions falling under Rock Steady on
     one side and Aristotle on the other. Rock Steady is the most
     accomplished author. Aristotle operated/operates a BBS called
     Black Axis. Nowhere Man attempted to steal the limelight from
     Phalcon/Skism by producing the Virus Creation Lab (VCL)
     engine a few weeks prior to the release of PS-MPC. The main
     problem is that the application did not work properly. Since
     1992 he has been working on the Nuke Encryption Device (the
     NED) which is a polymorphic engine similar to the Bulgarian,
     Dark Avenger Mutation Engine. The NED is the most
     sophisticated virus creation engine known. The anti-virus
     community have obtained a copy of the NED which was used in
     good effect to find an outbreak of the Itshard.A virus in
     Germany in 1994.

3.   TridenT - Holland. Leadership was Masouf Khafir (name might
     be Masud rather than Masouf) and Dark Helmet. John Tardy may
     have became the leader prior to the demise of the authoring
     group. Masouf Khafir wrote the Trident Polymorphic Engine
     (TPE) and is also accredited with the virus Cruncher which is
     a TSR that emulates compression programs such as Stacker.
     Trident also had Dark Ray and Crom Cruach. John Tardy wrote a
     complex polymorphic virus in 444 bytes which is a
     considerable accomplishment. A legislative change in Holland
     has curtailed production of viruses recently.

4.   VLAD - Worldwide with members in Australia, USA, Denmark,
     France and Luxembourg. This group is not as old as the others
     and I am unable to give too much information about it other
     than the perceived leadership is Australian.

5.   Others - The following information was provided to me by a
     virus author who is probably a member of VLAD:

     The current virus authoring groups are:

      Phalcon/Skism  - USA 3, Canada 1
      VLAD - Australia 3, USA 2, Denmark 1, France 1,
             Luxembourg 1 + 1
      IR (Immortal Riot) - Sweden 6
      Genesis - England 1, USA 1 + 1
      NuKE - USA 4, Australia 2, South Africa 1, Argentina 1
      FOTD - Russia 5, Sweden 1
      TPVO - Taiwan 6
      SVL - Slovakia 4
      Immortal EAS - Holland 4

Sara Gordon of the Computer Science Faculty at Indiana University
is the only individual that I am aware of who has made any formal
study of virus writers and found that most were normal male
children doing rebellious things. She found that most develop into
normal relationships and tend to stop writing viruses once they
take on other responsibilities. Sadly, a few appear to grow to
adults without developing ethical standards. I am aware that some
virus authors disagree with this assessment and obviously, there
where considerable constraints placed on the study, geographical,
right of access, etc. Nevertheless, her findings have to be
recognised until such time as a more comprehensive study can be
performed.

It seems that because most of these boys, all known virus writers
with any influence are male, are going through a normal
development process. It would be unwise to legislate too strongly
against their activity. Long jail sentences would not be
appropriate. Civil actions would be pointless as this would not
recover the cost of the prosecution.

Overall, there seems to be a well developed sub culture that
exists. This sub culture is world wide and can not therefore be
controlled by legislation.

     Conclusion
     ==========

It seems that the computer virus problem is here to stay, for the
next few years anyway. Certainly, all popular operating systems
currently in use have been attacked in some way or another. On the
other hand, as operating systems become more complex,
vulnerabilities may not be so obvious to the malicious author, who
will indeed require even greater skill to undermine the operating
system than his predecessors.

Another significant aspect for consideration is that fact that it
has been the anti-virus community that has made money out of the
virus phenomenon, not the authors. Any potential virus author with
the required level of programming skill may well choose to apply
for work in a software house rather than become a virus author.
The author of Stoned.Empire.Monkey virus may well have missed out
on a lucrative royalty income from his delvelopment of the virus.
The method used by the virus has been studied by most of the
anti-virus companies who have subsequently produced access control
software using a similar principle to that employed in the virus.

Regards... Greg Miskelly - gmiskelly@nicts.dnet.co.uk

