-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----



                         BILL LAMBDIN DEBUNKS INVIRCIBLE
                                  August 1, 1995


Here are the results of my test with InVircible 6.01C that I tested in
March 1995.
 
I'm releasing this report now because some people have stated that Vesselin
Bontchev's paper INVIRCIB.ZIP is too complex.

I released most of the data contained in this report to the Virus-L digest
on March 3rd. Almost two months before Vesselin released his paper on IV.

Allow me to place a caveat at the beginning of the report.

I tried to approach Zvi Netiv (The author of InVircible) about these
security problems (in August 1994). I would have preferred to work behind
the scenes and close these security issues than to post messages that
embarass Zvi or IV. Unfortunately Zvi wouldn't listen or take steps to
close these security holes, so I wasn't given any other option.

The results below are not opinion. They are facts.

IV failed my modified files test. IV only reported 4 of 6 modified files.

IVTEST runs two bait files. There are seven problems with this.
	a. Not all viruses will infect the same bait files.
        b. The largest bait file is too small. 8 Tunes refuses to infect
           any files smaller than 9216 bytes. Tremor refuses to infect
           any files smaller than 10240 bytes, and there are other
           viruses that refuse to infect anything smaller than 30720 bytes.
	c. let's use a virus like Icelandic.saratoga. This virus only
           infects every 10th .EXE file run. Even if the .EXE file were
           appropriate for Icelandic.Saratoga to infect, there is only a 1
           in 10 chance of Saratoga infecting the bait file.
	d. These bait files will not detect companion infectors.
	e. These bait files will not detect path companion infectors.
        f. Not all viruses are resident in memory.
        g. boot sector viruses do not infect files.

IV doesn't detect Tremor in RAM or on infected files When Tremor is active.
        Tremor  is a static sized polymorph that happens to be fully
        stealthed, and tunneling. Infected files increase in size by 4000
        bytes. Hooks INT 21h, and steals 4228 bytes of RAM. Tremor is
        currently spreading in the wild.


IV doesn't detect companion infectors.

IV doesn't detect path companion infectors.

IV doesn't check the entire file, but only gathers a small signature
        from file areas likely to be modified by a virus. This routine will
        miss viruses, and will not report all files corrupted by viruses.

IV doesn't have an option to check the integrity of all files. Many viruses
        also infect files regardless of extension as they are loaded and
        executed with DOS function call 4Bh when accessed through INT 21h.
        Two good examples of executable files with non executable
        extensions are the small programs in Side Kick, and PC-Tools
        Desktop.

IV doesn't detect 100% of all viruses (As Zvi claims). Since IV failed to
        detect Tremor, and companion infectors; I can truthfully say there
        is no way that IV could detect 100% of all viruses.

IV doesn't remove 100% of all viruses (as Zvi claims). MPC.Sara overwrites
        the entire file. There is no way that anyone can build the file
        back to the functioning state when the entire file is gone! So I
        can truthfully say that IV doesn't remove 100% of all viruses.
	
        In July 1995: Zvi Netiv admitted in the FIDO Virus conference that
        IV is unable to remove the One Half virus, or any of the
        overwriting viruses.

IV doesn't heal itself (as Zvi claims). Trivial.Vootie.66.a overwrote
        IV, and all bait files on the disk, and IV was unable to run
	or heal itself. So IV was dead in the water.

IV does place the integrity data files on the hard drive, leaving them
        open to attack from viruses.

IV does name all integrity data files the same. Any virus could me modified
        to delete these integrity data files.

If the integrity data files are corrupted or deleted, the generic
        detection, and generic removal capabilities are removed.

If the integrity Data files are deleted, IV asks if the user wants to
        check the directory; instead of reporting a problem the
        previous integrity data file was deleted. IV then mindlessly
        generates a new integrity data file for the directory. I might add
        this new integrity data file is generated AFTER infection. so IV
        can't detect or remove the virus because IV doesn't have a file
        signature that was generated before infection.

IVSCAN only detects 15% of my virus collection. AVP, F-Prot, and TBAV
        detect 98+% of my virus collection.

The viruses listed above are only examples of the many viruses that IV 
fails to detect or remove.

If you want a second opinion to my results.
 
Dr. Keith Jackson wrote a review of IV in Virus Bulletin in December 1994.

Vesselin Bontchev has written a 3000 line paper on IV; INVIRCIB.ZIP.
INVIRCIB.ZIP is available on several BBSs  including the Metaverse BBS
(606) 843-9363.

Some people will imply that I am on a vendetta to demolish InVircible.
 
This is not the case.

I wrote several messages on IV's behalf when Vesselin Bontchev labeled IV
as a trojan.

I wrote several messages on IV's behalf because I believed that Vesselin
was too critical of IV in some sections of his paper INVIRCIB.ZIP.

All I want is for the claims for the effectiveness of IV to resemble the
capabilities of IV.

Zvi has two ways to stop my criticisms of IV.

	1. Patch the security holes in IV.
        2. Remove the preposterous claims from the manual, and stop
           posting these preposterous claims in virus conferences.

At no time have I ever implied that IV is completely worthless. IV has some
rather interesting concepts. However; I am unable to recommend IV in good
conscience because of the security concerns described earlier.


                                    GLOSSARY

        Bait files: These are small do nothing programs that attempt to
                entice viruses to infect them.

        Boot Sector Virus: These viruses infect the boot sector of
                diskettes, and the Master Boot Record, or boot sector
                of hard drives.

        Companion Infectors: These viruses generaly create small .COM files
                with the same name of an .EXE files (These .COM files are
                placed in the same directory). If you do not specify an
                extension, DOS tries to load a .COM file with the same
                filename first. The .COM file contains the virus with a
                link to run the .EXE file after the virus has run.

        Data file: These are small files (created by A-V software) that
                contain information about the files on the computer.

        Fully stealthed: The virus will temporarily disinfect infected host
                files when the infected host files are opened for any
                reason, then reinfect the file when the file is closed.

        Overwriting Virus: These viruses overwrite the beginning of .COM
                files generaly. The original file is corrupted and will
                no longer run.

        Path Companion Infectors: These viruses work much like Companion
                Infectors described earlier. but the infected files are
                placed in the DOS path.

        Polymorph: The virus mutates on every infection, so the virus never
                looks the same twice. A simple scan string to detect the
                virus is useless.

        Resident: Hook Interrupts and remain active in RAM.

        Trojan: This is a program that appears to do something useful, but
                is slyly doing something destructive.

        Tunneling: Tunneling is a technique used by viruses to bypass
                resident software that monitors or attempts to stop
                disk access.


-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: 2.6.2
Comment: CS-251.ZIP (CHK-SAFE) is on the Metaverse, and Simtel mirrors.

iQCVAwUBMB2m0ksggM2nhQQZAQF2sQP/TqYpRQ8UYxXd7/agpzguhvzsyf5ZlMUO
meiRg5dNqeRvnfpSYWzqGFyAMVPxjtAa9LBb0GhBZJxF1G5hI5xzYAp2D6w3rMi7
bX5fj7lgmW02cP8XdJsC0CyyTIEpclCqluYqkA1rSHwHYgYltT0zv0rwP1MSDKTZ
GOThYHfPYaw=
=7ESc
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
