Interview with BlackArt by PetiK for PetiKVX Ezine #2

Date : 19/05/2002

Q: Where do you live ?
   How is the situation of the virus scene in your land ?

   I live in Japan. Well, no vxer is here. It seems that Japanese isn't
   interested in virus.

Q: Where you get your handle ?

   Just an inspiration. I've kept my handle since my first time to join IRC channel.

Q: How did you start out in computers ?

   I got my first PC about 3 years ago. And I start to enjoy internet
   and to learn programming immediately.

Q: When do you hear the first time about computer virus ?

   I don't remember that.

Q: What was your first virus ?

   Unreleased com overwritter. 

Q: How did you start out in the VX scene ?

   I got 29a zine. I found that's cool. Soon I started to learn asm 
   and collect virus related materials.

Q: What (virus-)groups are you/have been a member of ?
   How long time ?

   I've never belongged to any virus group.

Q: Which programming language are you using ?
   What is your favourite ?

   I use mainly asm, C/C++, ruby. For coding virus I use only asm.

Q: How many and wich virus (or worm) did you write ?
   Which do you like best and why ?

   I released 5 virus/worms.
   I-Worm.Japanize(AVP: I-worm.zircon.b)
   I-Worm.ZCypt(AVP: I-worm.zircon.a)
   Win32.Kamikaze.a(AVP: Win32.Kaze.2056)
   Win32.Kamikaze.b(AVP: Win32.Kaze.3228)
   Win32.Kamikaze.c(AVP: Win32.Kaze.4236)

   I don't have best one. coz I bored to code soon and stop to code,so all
   of my virus has no good quality.

Q: How do you name your virus (or worm) ?

   I name my virus from the feature or inspiration.

Q: Do you prefer virii or worm ?

   I like both virii and worm.

Q: What sort of VX technics is the most interesting ?

   Metamorphism. That is very powerful and difficult tech.

Q: Do you spread your works ?

   Never. I just put on my homepage.

Q: What operating system(s) are you using to test your works ?

   Win98se.

Q: Which ezine do you read ?

   29a, x-zine, mtx and so on.

Q: What do you think about dangerous payload ?

   Cool!!

Q: What do you think about virus/worm generator ?

   To create generators is good, but to use them is lame.

Q: What do you think about script (HTML,VBS,VBA) ?

   That's good if the virus has new concept.

Q: Which coder do you respect ?

   z0mbie and vecna.

Q: What are your favourite virus/worm and why ?

   ZMist. coz the most hard to detect.

Q: What is your favourite AV and why ?

   All AV sux.

Q: How do you see the virus and the worm in the future ?

   hmm.. I hope that metamorhpic virus increase.

Q: What piece of advice would you give to the newbies ?

   I don't have any advice. coz I'm still a newbie ;)

Q: Where can we see your works and how can we contact you ?

   Well, just send mail to g00dspeed@mail.ru

		Very Thanx.