Interview with Lord YuP by PetiK for PetiKVX Ezine #2

Date : 28/05/2002

Q:   Where do you live ?
     How is the situation of the virus scene in your land ?

YuP: I live in Poland, in small city.
     Situation? I know that we have a lot
     of crackerz, i know few guys programming virii,
     but i think that situation is BAD!!!
      
Q:   Where you get your handle ?

YuP: When i read A.Hitchcock books "Adventures of 3
     detectives" i want to be exactly like a guy named
     Jupiter (this name was funny ;]) so my friend changed it
     to YuP and now i'm Lord YuP ;)) (simple ;])

Q:   How did you start out in computers ?
    
YuP: Well, my first personal "computer" was Amiga
     600HD (20mb - w00h ;]) and of coz i was
     infected by a virus called "bytebandit", but coding
     in AMOS on AMIGA wasn't cool for me ;( so
     when the first internet-free-library (4 years later) 
     was opened i used to go there everyday. 
     Heh i was  coding my first virii (script virii) in
     a pices of paperz without computer ;( 
     4 years later i got my OWN PC!!! and you know
     the rest (now i'm 17! ;] and i'm 31337 ;)))    

Q:   When do you hear the first time about computer virus ?

YuP: In some news group, of coz when i was young.

Q:   What was your first virus ?

YuP: My very first virus was vbs.Dragonball, this 
     was lame. 

Q:   How did you start out in the VX scene ?

YuP: I sent a few articlez and virii to 29a#6 ;]

Q:   What (virus-)groups are you/have been a member of ?
     How long time ?

YuP: i'm currently a memeber of TKT (The Knight Templars),
     how long? - few months. 

Q:   Which programming language are you using ?
     What is your favourite ?

YuP: I know html,js,vbs,php,c,asm.
     My favourite is asm (for programz).

Q:   How many and wich virus (or worm) did you write ?
     Which do you like best and why ?

YuP: I have coded:

     :vbs.Dragonball
     :vbs.Dende
     :vbs/mhtml.Postcard@mm
     :i-worm/asm.BigBrother
     :php.karin
     :trojan/mircscript.prexer
     :trojan/mircscript.Mirc Socket Trojan + c client
     :winME.Wiedzmin 

     My best baby is Wiedzmin why? coz it is my very first
     win platform virus.

Q:   How do you name your virus (or worm) ?

YuP: I'm using namez from books,filmz,anime,manga everything ...

Q:   Do you prefer virii or worm ?

YuP: Mhh hard to tell, i prefer vir/worm ;]
     the best option ;]

Q:   What sort of VX technics is the most interesting ?

YuP: Meta enginez rox, A.I? yeah! that's cool and of coz
     bug searching + stealth - future of virus.   

Q:   Do you spread your works ?

YuP: Usually no, i only send them to AVP or any
     AV corp.

Q:   What operating system(s) are you using to test your works ?

YuP: Currently i have winme and mandrake linux, i'm coding in
     winasm so i'm using winme for asm workx, the rest (php,html)
     mhh they are tested on linux and win. 

Q:   Which ezine do you read ?

YuP: 29A, IKX, TKT (yet?) and PetiKVX of coz ;] 

Q:   What do you think about dangerous payload ?

YuP: Short answer: i hate them! guyz who are coding
     sth like that shouldn't be named as coderz.

Q:   What do you think about virus/worm generator ?

YuP: Not used nowadays, nothing interesting.

Q:   What do you think about script (HTML,VBS,VBA) ?

YuP: This is good for webmaster work or 5 minute 
     worm and bug m$ finding.

Q:   Which coder do you respect ?

YuP: I respect everyone.

Q:   What are your favourite virus/worm and why ?

YuP: I don't have favourite but i liked bumblebee'z
     work - i liked his style.

Q:   What is your favourite AV and why ?

YuP: I'm using NAV, so i think NAV is the worst ;)).

Q:   How do you see the virus and the worm in the future ?

YuP: A.I + meta + bug finding (sploiting) + plugins +
     stealth = PERFECT VIRUS ;]

Q:   What piece of advice would you give to the newbies ?
   
YuP: Don't pass, read, understand, read, understand, read,
     understand and so on. Faith! it will be good.

Q:   Where can we see your works and how can we contact you ?

YuP: My email: yup@tlen.pl 
     Group web: tkt.planetsecurity.net
                templars.org
                www.coderz.net/tkt



		Very Thanx.