Interview with ppacket by PetiK for PetiKVX Ezine #2

Date : 22/05/2002

Q: Where do you live ?
   How is the situation of the virus scene in your land ?
i am from the philippines and the vx scene here is quite slow nowadays 
coz of the release of the i love you virus.

Q: Where you get your handle ?
i came up with pickpacket coz it some how coincides with my personality,
i used to pick my dad's pocket instead of asking money for him. i chanced
pocket into packet to create digital image.

Q: How did you start out in computers ?
i came across a pc when i was 12 (it was my cousins pc) and got hooked into it.
i usually just play with it.

Q: When do you hear the first time about computer virus ?
well it was about when i bought my own pc when i was 15 it was a second hand
pc and when i first booted it up it just overwhelmed me.

Q: What was your first virus ?
it was die-hard (i think!!)

Q: How did you start out in the VX scene ?
i start just a year ago coz i was a frustrated hacker i gave up my chance
on hacking coz of lack of information. i saw my future in coding viruses.

Q: What (virus-)groups are you/have been a member of ?
   How long time ?
i was a member of PVW (Pinoy Virus Writers) for a year now and rRlf
(Ready Rangers Liberation Front) for 3 months now.

Q: Which programming language are you using ?
   What is your favourite ?
i used pascal, vba, c. but i like vba more cause it is easy to learn and use.

Q: How many and which virus (or worm) did you write ?
   Which do you like best and why ?
i have coded 3 viruses as of now, it was W97M_intruded.a, revenge, and EDSA 4,
the last two doesn't have av names as of now.

Q: How do you name your virus (or worm) ?
usually i write viruses from things that irritate me and name them after that.

Q: Do you prefer virii or worm ?
i like worm coz it has more chance of spreading.

Q: What sort of VX technics is the most interesting ?
i like encryption coz it just hides away the virus from av's.

Q: Do you spread your works ?
as of now i don't coz i don't have as much time now.

Q: What operating system(s) are you using to test your works ?
mostly win97/98 but sometimes on win2000.

Q: Which ezine do you read ?
i read all sorts specially rRlf and PVW.

Q: What do you think about dangerous payload ?
i just sucks it alwaways minimizes the chance of the virus to replicate and
infect other pc's.

Q: What do you think about virus/worm generator ?
it is good if you want to study it, and want to create viruses from that
language but to use it and say you create it in not. it gives the author of
the generator more credits.

Q: What do you think about script (HTML,VBS,VBA) ?
it is good coz it is easy to learn.

Q: Which coder do you respect ?
i respect any coder who jsut give respect to other coderz.

Q: What are your favourite virus/worm and why ?
i like melissa coz it started out the first worm in macro viruses.

Q: What is your favourite AV and why ?
i like norton antivirus coz its just good.

Q: How do you see the virus and the worm in the future ?
if the coders generate more interest in creating new ideas i think it will be
a mass hysteria.

Q: What piece of advice would you give to the newbies ?
jsut learn the language first and don't be shy to ask for help, and stay away
from dangerous payloads it sucks!!.

Q: Where can we see your works and how can we contact you ?
it have a hp: http://ppacket.20m.com and email:ppacket@rRlf.de


		Very Thanx.